Applied Geography 109 (2019) 102034

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

# Applied Geography

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apgeog

## Mapping harmspots: An exploration of the spatial distribution of crime harm

Danielle M. Fenimore

Texas State University, School of Criminal Justice, 601 University Drive San Marcos, TX, 78666, United States

### T

###### A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords: Harmspots Weighted density mapping Crime harm index Kernel density estimation

A B S T R A C T

Recent attention to the use of harm indices to weight crime counts in mapping analysis has led to the development of “harm spot” maps. Early studies have shown that harm spots (i.e., clusters of harm-weighted crimes) follow geographic patterns similar to (unweighted crime) hot spots, although harm spots have been found to be moderately more spatially concentrated than hot spots. This research explores how the spatial distribution of harm spots using police-recorded crime data for Washington, DC differs from raw unweighted crime. The results suggest harm spots are diffused away from the city center into more residential areas. However, this is largely an effect of the distribution of violent crime, rather than the distribution of property crime. This implies opportunities for more serious offenses could be higher in residential areas, or areas further from where most crime typically occurs, and that different social ecological processes underlie the spatial distribution of more – versus less – serious crime. Implications for theory, policy, and research are discussed.

#### 1. Introduction

It is commonplace for researchers and others to rank cities, neighborhoods, states, and even countries as safe or risky places based on crime counts or annual crime rates. These ranks tend to be based on violent crime or even all crime (of any type). Without considering the amount of harm that is caused by each specific type of crime, this can make such rankings misleading. For example, a list of Canada's most dangerous cities identified Prince George as high-risk, despite most of the crime consists of thefts and other lesser crimes; a very different list resulted when the seriousness of the crimes were taken into account (ranks were calculated as the ratio between the crime-seriousnessweighted and unweighted crime counts; Boivin, 2014); Toronto went up from 75th (out of 104 cities) to second most dangerous city, Montreal from 45th to third, and Calgary from 62nd to ninth. From such findings, Boivin (2014) concluded that “… crime rates, considered only as volume of crime, fail to reflect the intensity of crimes in a society …” (p. 905).

The idea that crime should be weighted based on seriousness to fully understand the effect it has on communities has been recently applied to hot spot maps, which tend to consider crime patterns at a micro level. The very few studies in this area have shown that harm is marginally more spatially concentrated than raw crime counts (Weinborn, Ariel, Sherman, & O’Dwyer, 2017). To date, however, there has been no systematic evaluation of how the use of crime harm/seriousness weighting scales can affect the resulting harm spot maps. This research aims to contribute to the evidence base by answering this very question,

using crime data from Washington, DC, and weighting methods proposed by Sherman, Neyroud, and Neyroud (2016) and Wolfgang, Figlio, Tracy, and Singer (1985). The paper is structured as follows: first, the existing literature is reviewed, discussing the development of harm spot mapping. The focus is on spatial crime analysis, the analysis of geographic hot spots of crime, and the creation of crime seriousness scales. The review of the literature concludes with research that has been conducted specifically on mapping harm spots. The data sources and analytical strategy are then described, and this is followed by a discussion of the results of these analyses. The article ends with a discussion of the findings, including the theoretical and policy implications of examining the spatial patterning of crime severity.

1.1. Spatial analysis of crime

It is generally agreed upon that crime is not randomly distributed in space (Eck, Chainey, Cameron, Leitner, & Wilson, 2005; Eck, Clarke, & Guerette, 2007; Sherman, Gartin, & Buerger, 1989; Weisburd, 2015). Weisburd (2015) has formalized a law of crime concentration which states, “for a defined measure of crime at a specific microgeographic unit, the concentration of crime will fall within a narrow bandwidth of percentages for a defined cumulative proportion of crime” (p. 138). Research supports such a law. For example, Sherman, Buerger, and Gartin (1989) found that 50% of 323,979 police calls for service in Minneapolis over a 12-month period were concentrated in 3% of places. Such clustering of crime is not uncommon, and generally follows the basic premise of the 80-20 rule, also known as the Pareto law (see

E-mail addresses: dmf83@txstate.edu, danielle.fenimore@txstate.edu.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2019.06.002 Received 3 December 2018; Received in revised form 29 May 2019; Accepted 3 June 2019

Available online 12 June 2019 0143-6228/ © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Clementi & Gallegati, 2005; Eck et al., 2007), in which a large proportion (about 80%) of cases relates to just a small proportion (20%) of units.

When crime is clustered at specific addresses or other small places, these clusters are referred to as “hot spots” (Eck et al., 2005; Sherman et al., 1989). More specifically, a hot spot is commonly defined as an “… area that has a greater than average numbers of criminal or disorder events, or an area where people have a higher than average risk of victimization” (Eck et al., 2005, p. 2). As the geographic unit becomes smaller, crime becomes more concentrated. The goal of hot spot analysis has generally been to inform police practice so that limited existing resources can be efficiently and effectively allocated (Eck et al., 2007; Eck et al., 2005). This has led to various lines of research including, but not limited to, testing policing techniques to decrease crime at these addresses (see Braga & Bond, 2008; Braga, Hureau, & Papachristos, 2011; Braga et al., 1999; Caeti, 1999; Cohen, Gorr, & Singh, 2003; Lawton, Taylor, & Luongo, 2005; Mazerolle, Price, & Roehl, 2000; Ratcliffe, Taniguchi, Groff, & Wood, 2011; Sherman, Buerger, & Gartin, 1989; Sherman, Gartin, et al., 1989; Sherman & Rogan, 1995; Sherman & Weisburd, 1995; Taylor, Koper, & Woods, 2011; Weisburd & Green, 1995; Weisburd et al., 2006), determining what environmental factors lend to clustering of crime offenses at one address (e.g., Anyinam, 2015; Drawve, Thomas, & Walker, 2016; Dugato, 2013; Hart & Miethe, 2015; Summers & Caballero, 2017), and identifying targeted programs and policies that prevent offending or can mitigate the effects of it (Braga, 2001, 2005; Braga, Papachristos, & Hureau, 2014; Chamlin & Scott, 2014; Koper, Taylor, & Woods, 2013; Lum, Hibdon, Cave, Koper, & Merola, 2011; National Research Council, 2004).

Crime seriousness scales can be useful in refining the dangerousness approximations provided by hot spot maps and allow for alternative insights of what is a dangerous place (Ashby, 2017; Kwan, Ip, & Kwan, 2000; Rossi, Waite, Bose, & Berk. 1974; Sweeten, 2012; Wolfgang et al., 1985). The concentration of crime at specific addresses also helps to identify which areas are the most dangerous and has implications for community and neighborhood levels of fear of crime (Wyant, 2008). Crime seriousness scales can be useful in refining the dangerousness approximations provided by hot spot maps and allow for alternative insights of what is a dangerous place (Ashby, 2017; Kwan et al., 2000; Rossi, Waite, Bose, & Berk, 1974; Sweeten, 2012; Wolfgang et al., 1985). Ratcliffe and Kikuchi (2019) also examined the use of crime seriousness scales in triaging and prioritizing officer target selection for investigation and surveillance, finding that such an approach was more effective at identifying high risk offenders. Such an application is useful in triaging and prioritizing micro-locations as well.

- 1.2. Measuring crime harm


Objective approaches to the measurement of crime seriousness have aimed to assess crime harm via sentence severity and/or official crime statistics. For example, Statistics Canada, the agency responsible for publishing information on crime rates in Canada, calculates a crime severity score as the annual average of the sentences given for each crime type multiplied by the relevant observed incarceration rate. The Police-Reported Crime Severity Index (PRCSI) can then be derived by calculating the crime severity score for the last five years. This index is updated every year and used to calculate harm-weighted annual crime rates (Babyak, Alavi, Collins, Halladay, & Tapper, 2009). Although harm indices based on actual sentences and criminal histories have been argued to be a good proxy for popular opinion, sentences received are also influenced by variables unrelated to the harm caused to the victim, such as crime history and aggravating and mitigating circumstances of the offense (e.g., a weapon being involved in the commission of the offense; see Sherman et al., 2016; Sullivan & Su-Wuen, 2012; Sullivan, Su-Wuen, & McRae, 2017).

Sherman et al.’s (2016) Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI) is based

on English-Welsh sentencing guidelines, more specifically the baseline or “starting point” level sentences. This approach, they argued, is more appropriate in that the harm resulting from a crime is not affected by the offender's record, whereas the actual sentences received can be. Sherman et al. (2016) favored the starting point over the maximum sentences, as the latter are less likely to capture a “typical” sentence for a particular crime. Mid-range/median tariffs are also stipulated in the English-Welsh sentencing guidelines, but these are calculated after taking into consideration aggravating and mitigating factors and are, therefore, less suitable. In their view, using the starting point approach “would reflect the nature of the offense, rather than the offender, and would allow a substantial differentiation between … a murder and a bicycle theft” (p. 177).

The CHI is based on the suggested number of days of imprisonment. Where offenses require that the offender pay a fine instead, the sentences are converted to prison days by calculating how many days it would take to pay the fine at minimum wage pay. Community service sentences are similarly converted into days. The purpose of Sherman et al.’s (2016) paper was to provide a guide for applying a general crime harm index to any country's official data. To date, Sherman et al.’s (2016) Cambridge CHI has only been adapted for use in New Zealand (Curtis-Ham & Walton, 2017b). The CHI is also designed to meet a three-pronged test, which ensures that the use of such an index is democratic, in which the index reflects “the resolution of conflicting viewpoints [and] … reflecting the will of the people” (Sherman et al., 2016, p. 174); is reliable, in which the index can be consistently applied across units of analysis; and that the index is cost effective, in which it can be adopted without additional cost to the agency employing it.

- 1.3. Harmspot mapping

Recently the concept of considering crime seriousness when studying crime patterns has been applied to crime mapping and led to the development of harmspot maps (Weinborn et al., 2017). Heat maps, or hotspot analyses, focus on the density of raw crime counts and, as such, can fail to emphasize how dangerous a specific area may be, simply because it treats all crimes equally. But, as argued, different types of crime have different levels of potential harm. Harmspot maps aim to address this issue by applying a relative weight to each incident when examining where crime clusters geographically. The goal here is to provide a more thorough definition of what areas are “high” and “low” in crime, having considered the potential harm to the surrounding community.

Harmspot analysis is relatively new, with only one study having been published. Weinborn et al. (2017) generated harmspots using Sherman et al.’s (2016) CHI to weight crime incidents. The results of this analysis indicated that harm-weighted crime is more concentrated than raw crime counts. The authors found that 50% of crime events were concentrated in 3% of all street segments, while 50% of harm was concentrated in only 1% of street segments. The results of this research indicated harm is even more likely to adhere to Weisburd's (2015) “law of concentration of crime in place”. Weinborn et al. (2017) argued that focusing on harm increases cost effectiveness of police patrol and reduces the risk of crimes that are more likely to cause significant harm to victims.

- 1.4. The current study


Weighting a crime by the gravity of its effects provides a better measure of how dangerous a place can be (Boivin, 2014). However, there is no consensus yet as to which weighting system should be used in ranking tables and/or harmspot maps. The harmspot map literature is also extremely limited, and more research is needed to validate any emerging findings. To address these issues, this research explores how the level of spatial concentration and the distribution of risk varies across (unweighted) crime hotspot and harm-weighted harmspot maps,

using three different crime seriousness weighting scales. The three scales considered are Sherman et al. (2016) Crime Harm Index (CHI) which is based on English-Welsh sentencing guidelines, a newly developed scale which employs Sherman et al. (2016) CHI methodology but using baseline sentences from the American Federal Sentencing Guidelines, and an adapted version of Wolfgang et al.’s (1985) NSCS scale.

#### 2. Methods

- 2.1. Data sources


Geocoded crime data recorded in the District of Columbia (DC) area are used in the present study. These data include the address, geographic coordinates, date, and time of every offense reported to the Metropolitan Police Department during 2016 (N = 37,183 offenses). It must be kept in mind these data only include reported crimes in Washington, DC, and that the city expands beyond the District's official boundaries. Unfortunately, data for the counties bordering DC are not available and cannot be incorporated into the analysis. This will lead to boundary effects (i.e., inaccurate density estimates near the boundaries).

The crime data were downloaded from Washington, DC's open data portal which stores thousands of raw, uncleaned datasets from all offices in the local government for the public to access freely for their own research. The nine crime types included in the study are all Part I Index crimes, namely arson, assault with a dangerous weapon, burglary, homicide, motor vehicle theft, robbery, sex abuse, theft from an automobile, and other theft. Assaults with a dangerous weapon were disaggregated into two offense types, based on a secondary variable (method) that indicated the type of weapon used; the two new offense types were assaults with guns and/or knives, and assaults involving other weapons. The former were categorized as “aggravated assaults,” and the latter as “other assaults.” This resulted in 10 crime categories which better matched the offenses used in Sherman et al. (2016). These categories, with their corresponding number of recorded crimes, are listed in Table 1.

2.2. Crime harm weighting scales

Three separate weighting scales were compared for this study. The first was developed by Sherman et al. (2016) using the UK Sentencing Guidelines. This scale was published as the Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI; CHIUK for the purposes of this paper). The weights assigned to each of the 10 offense types in this scale are displayed on Table 1. The second scale follows the guidelines provided by Sherman et al. (2016) for creating a CHI, but uses the United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines to calculate the weights (CHIUS, hereafter); the specific offenses (as recorded in the sentencing guidelines) considered for each of the 10 categories in this research are listed in Appendix B.

The third scale was adapted using median scores of offenses listed in the NSCS by Wolfgang et al. (1985; rounded to the nearest whole number, to be consistent with both CHI scales; see Appendix B). The first notable attempt to develop a crime seriousness scale and produce a viable way to weight offenses dates to Wolfgang at el.’s (1985) seminal survey of public perceptions, known as the National Survey of Crime Severity (NSCS). This scale was created by asking 60,000 respondents to rate the seriousness of hypothetical offenses, each time comparing these to bicycle theft, which the researchers assign a seriousness score of 10 and used this as a point of reference. For instance, an offense given a score of 20 would be twice as serious as a bicycle theft. The crime seriousness score for each offense type was calculated as the geometric mean of all respondent scores for that particular offense. Other studies employing subjective measures have involved seeking ratings from crime victims (e.g., Ignatans & Pease, 2016), although these are often unreliable for rare crimes and lacking when victims are

unable to score the offense (e.g., in the case of homicide). Once all three scales had been finalized, they were standardized to a 0–100 proportional scale to make them comparable (see Fig. 1). It is these transformed scales that were then used to create the harm-weighted kernel density estimation (KDE) maps (see Fig. 2).

#### 3. Results

A cursory visual examination of the unweighted spatial crime distribution (see KDE map in Fig. 2, map A) shows that crime clusters in the city center. This is where most of the entertainment venues and tourist attractions are located, and such patterns are consistent with prior research (e.g., Bernasco & Block, 2011; Brantingham & Brantingham, 1995; Kinney, Brantingham, Wuschke, Kirk, & Brantingham, 2008); several universities are also located close to this area. Harm-weighted crime also generally concentrates in the city center, and this is due to the pure volume of lesser crimes in the area; the stability of the city center hotspot across the different maps illustrates how the combined total harm of lesser crimes can keep the area hot because of the frequency with which they occur. More serious offenses occur much less often but, because they are weighted much more heavily in the harmspot maps, they lead to the emergence of additional hotspots away from the city center. This was the case for the CHIweighted harmspot maps, in particular the UK version. Surprisingly, the NSCS-weighted harmspot map lacked such additional hotspots, but harm did appear to be more dispersed than the unweighted KDE map.

The level of concentration, however, seemed to be fairly similar across all four KDE maps. The empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF) in Fig. 3 (which use the cells in the KDE map grid as the unit of analysis) indicated 50% of all crime occurred within approximately 7.5% of the total number of cells. This level of crime density is consistent with previous research (Eck et al., 2007; Eck et al., 2005; Sherman, Gartin, et al., 1989; Weisburd, 2015). The ECDF also indicates 100% of crime occurs within about 45% of all cells. When using the CHIUK- and the NSCS-weighted scale, 50% of the total harm is contained within approximately 7.5% of all cells. Similarly, when the CHIUS scales are applied, 50% of all harm occurs within approximately 9% of all cells. The weighted and unweighted crime maps are extremely similar, and likely within the range of expected variation. While this may seem inconsistent with the findings of Weinborn et al.’s (2017) study, where harm was found to be more concentrated than unweighted crime (50% of harm contained within 1% vs. 50% of crime contained within 3% of street segments), this is likely a result of the use of a different unit of analysis. Street segments (Weinborn et al., 2017) are likely to occupy multiple grid cells in a map. For this reason, the concentration is likely to be more or less consistent between studies.

Taken together, these results indicate that harm density appears to follow a different geographic pattern than unweighted crime, despite harm being similarly concentrated. In the three harmspot maps, the higher intensity (darker) spots no longer are indicative of where more crimes have occurred, but rather where the most serious crimes, and more specifically homicides, are located. The concentration of harm close to the southeast border of the District is clearer; it is therefore arguable that the southeastern part of the District is equally as “harmful” as the city center – at least when harm is estimated using the CHI scales – but has a lower crime rate overall.1 Harm may be the result

1 A supplemental analysis utilizing kernel density estimation was conducted utilizing the CHIUS to understand how disaggregating crime by property and violent affects the distribution of crime harm. Larger areas of harm appear when weighting the property crimes, though the distribution is largely the same as the unweighted crime maps. When examining the weighted violent crime kernel density map, crime harm becomes more concentrated, and largely follows the distribution in Map C in Fig. 2, indicating that violent crimes largely drive the unique, non-random distributions of crime harm observed in the results of the present study.

Table 1 Number and percentage of offenses in 2016 in Washington, DC, and corresponding raw and standardized crime weights for each of the three crime seriousness scales, by crime type.

Recorded crime CHIUK scores CHIUS scoresa NSCS scoresb

N % Raw Std. Raw Std. Raw Std.

Property Offenses Arson 6 <0.03 33 0.6 810 22.3 22 56.4 Burglary 2121 5.7 20 0.4 540 14.9 6 15.4 Motor vehicle theft 2690 7.2 20 0.4 810 22.3 8 20.5 Other theft 14,511 39.0 2 0.0 0 0.0 3 7.7 Theft from auto 12,135 32.6 2 0.0 0 0.0 7 17.9 Violent Offenses Aggravated assault 1580 4.3 20 0.4 450 12.4 16 41.0 Homicide 136 0.4 5475 100.0 1890 52.1 39 100.0 Other assault 689 1.9 1 0.0 0 0.0 7 17.9 Robbery 2969 8.0 365 6.7 990 27.3 9 23.1 Sexual abuse 346 0.9 365 6.7 3630 100.0 20 51.3 Total 37,183 100.0

- a Scores were calculated using the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines (see Appendix B).
- b Scores were calculated using the National Survey of Crime Severity (NSCS) scores by Wolfgang et al. (1985; see Appendix C).


- Fig. 1. Comparison of data point spread within 100-point standardized weighted scales, for the Crime Harm Indices (both UK and US versions), and the National Survey of Crime Severity (NSCS) scale.


of a different, non-random process than the one underlying the development of crime hotspots.

#### 4. Discussion

The current study provides the first application of a crime seriousness scale to the spatial distribution of crime harm in the United States. In line with Weisburd's (2015) law of crime concentration, 50% of crime harm was spatially clustered within approximately 7.5% of the area. Harm was equally concentrated (i.e., 50% of harm contained with 6–9% of grid cells in the map). This is not unlike the findings presented by Weinborn et al. (2017), where harm was found to be similarly spatially concentrated as unweighted crime (1% of street segments vs. 3% street segments, respectively). However, the unit of analysis differs from study to study, making the differences in the findings only superficial. The higher degree of concentration of unweighted crime and crime harm presented in the present study may be a result of the use of grid cells as the unit of analysis when examining the concentration of harm. Continued research on the concentration of harm will be able to clarify these issues.

Despite having similar levels of concentration, the geographic distribution of harm seemed to follow a different non-random distribution

than that to which crime traditionally adheres; while unweighted crime clustered mostly around the city center, harm appeared to also affect other areas, although differences existed among the three crime seriousness scales. The additional hotspots observed in the two CHIweighted harmspot maps indicated more serious crimes were more prevalent further away from the city center. This implies that focusing on hotspots may indeed reduce the number of crimes, but perhaps draw attention away from more serious and dangerous crimes. The NSCSweighted harmspot map was the most similar to the unweighted-crime hotspot map, which may be due to the way data points are more evenly spread across this particular scale (see above). Another possibility is that this scale, being based on subjective perceptions of crime seriousness, is a proxy for fear of victimization rather than actual crime seriousness. Further research is necessary to untangle this relationship.

The results of the present analysis indicate that harm may follow different social ecological processes than those underlying the spatial distribution of crime. The majority of crimes occur where most people congregate (Cohen & Felson, 1979; Mayhew & Levinger, 1976; Wirth, 1938). In urban areas, population density – most notably within city centers – leads to more interactions with others, which creates crime opportunities and results in increased crime rates. However, more serious crimes, such as homicide, appear to be further away from the city

##### Fig. 2. Kernel density estimation (KDE) maps of all crime, based on unweighted crimes (map A), and crimes weighted using the UK version of the Crime Harm Index(CHIUK; map B), the CHI US version (CHIUS; map C), and the National Survey of Crime Severity (NSCS) scale (map D).

##### Fig. 3. Spatial concentration of unweighted and harm-weighted crime, using the kernel density estimation (KDE) cell as the unit of analysis, and the Crime HarmIndices (both UK and US versions), and the National Survey of Crime Severity (NSCS) scale.

center, where there are potentially fewer people. Thorough replication and further exploration of the causes and geographic correlates of this pattern is necessary to fully understand why this is occurring. Drawing from the tenets of routine activity theory (Cohen & Felson, 1979), it is possible that these crimes are being committed in less visible places (e.g., in the offender or victim's home) where guardianship is low. Other environmental features may also be conducive to more – rather than less – serious crime.

There are limitations to the present study that should be mentioned. The first is that the data employed are publicly accessible data that lack the nuanced detail required to perform more comprehensive comparisons. For example, the NSCS scale is based on public perceptions of crime seriousness, but the crimes featured in this scale are extremely detailed and compounded by aggravating circumstances when presented to each respondent; such detailed crime seriousness scores had to be aggregated to create an overall score for the crime types recorded in the available data.

Additionally, the most recent test of the original CHI scale by Weinborn et al. (2017) expanded the “menu” of offenses to include all those listed in the English-Wales sentencing guidelines. The offenses in the present study were limited to Part I Index Crimes and the only detail that was available was whether a weapon was used in the commission of the crime. Including a weapon allowed for discernment between assault and aggravated assault, but this was the highest degree of detail that was able to be obtained for the data. Part II Crimes or nuisance offenses that comprise the bulk of police calls for service were also not excluded. This data is often not considered when reporting national crime trends, and is likely the reason why additional data is excluded. A possible next step would be to follow the methodology outlined in Weinborn et al. (2017) and construct a full offense “menu” which includes all offense types listed in the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines, as well as less-serious nuisance offenses, both frequent and non-frequent, and white collar crime. Once this is done, a closer replication of comparison of Weinborn et al.’s (2017) harmspot study can be conducted with a broader and more comprehensive set of crime types.

Having said this, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines is a complex document that requires a significant amount of detail about the offense, and sometimes about the offender, before a suitable sentence (and a crime seriousness score) can be assigned. While the current application of the Guidelines standardized sentencing across similar cases, it also decreased the precision with which the CHIUS crime seriousness scale was developed. For example, the crime seriousness score for the homicide category in the Washington, DC, crime data was based on the sentences for the six subcategories of homicide in the Federal Sentencing Guidelines. Further, Sherman et al.’s (2016) CHI scale considered information about fines and community service, which likely resulted in more accurate scores for lesser crimes; unfortunately, the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines do not include this information.

Additional consideration in the future should be made for the type of scale that is being used to measure harm. Both subjective (e.g., Wolfgang et al., 1985) and objective measures (e.g. Sherman et al., 2016) have been proposed for measuring harm. The results presented in the present study indicate that different spatial distributions appear when both objective and subjective measures are employed, though

#### Appendix A. Supplementary data

based on previous research (Stylianou, 2003), there should be a significant degree of agreement between both types of scales. Crimes that cause the most harm (e.g., resulting in serious bodily injury or death) are consistently rated as the most serious, and violent crimes are consistently rated more serious than property crimes (Stylianou, 2003). Research on weighting crimes and how these can provide more accurate measures of dangerousness have been conducted primarily in Canada (Babyak et al., 2009) and the United Kingdom (Ariel, Weinborn, & Sherman, 2016; Weinborn et al., 2017), with some studies also emerging in China (Kwan et al., 2000), New Zealand (Curtis-Ham & Walton, 2017a), Western Australia (House & Neyroud, 2018), and select locations in the United States (Burton et al., 2004; Ratcliffe & Kikuchi, 2019).

Future research should also focus on the distribution of harm when crime is disaggregated by property and violent crimes, as well as the distribution of Part II Index Crimes. House and Neyroud (2018) reported that there was a natural jump in harm scores in the break between offenses receiving a fine and offenses receiving prison sentences. While the offenses included were more detailed in House and Neyroud's work, similar breaks can be seen in the indices employed in the present study, resulting in a violent crime effect that can be observed in the CHI-weighted maps. A supplemental analysis was conducted examining the effect of disaggregating the crime data ultimately supporting this assertion. However, future research should not neglect the effect of disaggregating crime by violent and property offenses has on the results of similar analyses, as this has potential implications for routine activity theory (Cohen & Felson, 1979) and crime pattern theory (Brantingham & Brantingham, 1984).

The purpose of this research was to extend the evidence base relating to the spatial patterns of crime-related harm, and also to provide a systematic comparison of crime seriousness weighting scales and their resulting harmspot maps. CHI scales are based on local sentencing guidelines and likely sensitive to cultural variations across countries, as well as whether said countries favor a retributive or a restorative approach to justice. However, the trends in crime and the distribution of harm is likely to differ between jurisdictions (House & Neyroud, 2018), so replication of the present study is suggested to further explore how crime harm changes over time and space. Additionally, crime-related harm also concerns the economic cost to society, and/or to the victim, and can result in varying degrees of personal injury which may not necessarily be considered in suggested baseline sentences. In any case, the CHI scales provided a stronger distinction between higher- and lower-harm offense types and their continued use is suggested, but so is research exploring alternative ways of measuring crime-related harm.

#### Declarations of interest

None.

#### Acknowledgement

Special thanks to Marcus Felson for helping develop this paper in its original conception, and Lucia Summers for hours of editing and proof reading.

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2019.06.002.

#### Appendix B. Offense definitions used to calculate median harm scores from the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines (United StatesSentencing Commission, 2016), based on Sherman et al. (2016) Crime Harm Index (CHI).

Offense Type Median a

Sex Abuse b 32.0 Aggravated sexual abuse under 18 U.S.C. §2241(c) 38.0 Sexual abuse by force, fraud, or coercion of children under 14 years old, under 18 U.S.C. §1591(b)(1) 34.0 Other aggravated sexual abuse 30.0 Other aggravated sexual abuse of minors 14.0

Homicide 25.5 First degree murder (Statutory Provisions: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 1841(a)(2)(C), 1992(a)(7), 2113(e), 2118(c)(2), 2199, 2282A, 2291, 2332b(a)(1), 2340A; 21 U.S.C. § 848(e))

43.0

Second degree murder (Statutory Provisions: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 1841(a)(2)(C), 2199, 2282A, 2291, 2332b(a)(1), 2340A) 38.0 Voluntary manslaughter (Statutory Provisions: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1841(a)(2)(C), 2199, 2291, 2332b(a)(1)) 29.0 Involuntary manslaughter involving the reckless operation of a means of transportation 22.0 Involuntary manslaughter involving reckless conduct 18.0 Involuntary manslaughter involving criminal negligence 12.0

Robbery 20.0 Such offenses include “thefts from the person by means of force or fear” (p. 109) Departures may occur with aggravating circumstances (e.g., discharging a firearm or brandishing a deadly weapon); however, the base line offense is listed with a score of 20

20.0

Arson * 18.0 “… if the offense (A) created a substantial risk of death or serious bodily injury to any person other than a participant in the offense, and that risk was created knowingly; or (B) involved the destruction or attempted destruction of a dwelling, an airport, an aircraft, a mass transportation facility, a mass transportation vehicle, a maritime facility, a vessel, or a vessel's cargo, a public transportation system, a state or government facility, an infrastructure facility, or a place of public use …” (p. 257)

24.0

“… if the offense (A) created a substantial risk of death or serious bodily injury to any person other than a participant in the offense; (B) involved the destruction or attempted destruction of a structure other than (i) a dwelling, or (ii) an airport, an aircraft, a mass transportation facility, a mass transportation vehicle, a maritime facility, a vessel, or a vessel's cargo, a public transportation system, a state or government facility, an infrastructure facility, or a place of public use; or (C) endangered (i) a dwelling, (ii) a structure other than a dwelling, or (iii) an airport, an aircraft, a mass transportation facility, a mass transportation vehicle, a maritime facility, a vessel, or a vessel's cargo, a public transportation system, a state or government facility, an infrastructure facility, or a place of public use …” (p. 257)

20.0

“… if the offense involved the destruction of or tampering with aids to maritime navigation …” (p. 257) 16.0 “… 2 plus the offense level from §2B1.1 (Theft, Property Destruction, and Fraud) …” (p. 257) 2.0

Motor Vehicle Theft 18.0 Carjacking 22.0 Organized scheme to steal vehicles/parts 14.0

Burglary 14.5 Of a residence 17.0 Of a structure other than a residence 12.0

Aggravated Assault 14.0

“… a felonious assault that involved (A) a dangerous weapon with intent to cause bodily injury (i.e., not merely to frighten) with that weapon …” (p. 60) Departures may occur with aggravating circumstances (e.g., discharging a firearm or brandishing a deadly weapon); however, the base line offense is listed with a score of 14.

14.0

Theft c

Includes the following offenses: “larceny, embezzlement, and other forms of theft; offenses involving stolen property; property damage or destruction; fraud and deceit; forgery; offenses involving altered or counterfeit instruments other than counterfeit bearer obligations of the United States” (p. 88) “… if (A) the defendant was convicted of an offense referenced to this guideline; and (B) that offense of conviction has a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years or more …” (p. 88)

7.0

Other theft not described above 6.0

Other Assault 4.5 “… if the offense involved physical contact, or if a dangerous weapon (including a firearm) was possessed and its use was threatened …” (p. 61)

7.0

An assault otherwise not described above 2.0

NOTE: Fraud is a plausible motivating factor in many property offenses, due to the potential money that can be gained from any resulting insurance payouts. The presence of “fraud” in the descriptions above is likely related to such motivations.

- a Scores were rounded to the next highest value; the lowest sentence length (in months) in the range associated with that number in the Sentencing Guidelines Table was selected to calculate to the harm score (calculated in sentence length in days, as suggested by Sherman et al., 2016).
- b Calculations for sex abuse exclude trafficking and commercialized sex offenses.
- c This is a collapsed category that includes both general theft and theft from an automobile; the descriptions of larceny/theft in the U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines did not distinguish between the two.


* Indicates an offense in which the base line offense score calculation includes instructions to apply the greatest score.

#### Appendix C. Offense scenarios from the National Survey of Crime Severity (NSCS; Wolfgang et al., 1985) used to calculate the medianharm scores for the NSCS scale.

Offense Type Median

Homicide 39.0 A person plants a bomb in a public building. The bomb explodes and 20 people are killed. 72.1 A man forcibly rapes a woman. As a result of physical injuries, she dies. 52.8 A parent beats his young child with his fists. As a result, the child dies. 47.8 A person plants a bomb in a public building. The bomb explodes and one person is killed. 43.9 A person robs a victim at gunpoint. The victim struggles and is shot to death. 43.2 A man stabs his wife. As a result, she dies. 39.2 A factory knowingly gets rid of its waste in a way that pollutes the water supply of a city. As a result, 20 people die. 39.1 A person stabs a victim to death. 35.7 A person intentionally injures a victim. As a result, the victim dies. 35.6 A woman stabs her husband. As a result, he dies. 27.9 A factory knowingly gets rid of its waste in a way that pollutes the water supply of a city. As a result one person dies. 19.9 A person kills a victim by recklessly driving an automobile. 19.5 Knowing that a shipment of cooking oil is bad, a store owner decides to sell it anyway. Only one bottle is sold and the purchaser dies. 17.8

Arson 22.0 A person intentionally sets fire to a building causing $100,000 worth of damage. 24.9 A person intentionally sets fire to a building causing $500,000 worth of damage. 22.3 A person intentionally sets fire to a building causing $10,000 worth of damage. 12.7

Sex Abuse 20.0 A man forcibly rapes a woman. Her physical injuries require hospitalization. 30.0 A man forcibly rapes a woman. No other physical injury occurs. 25.8 A man tries to entice a minor into his car for immoral purposes. 25.2 A man forcibly rapes a woman. Her physical injuries require treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 20.1 A man runs his hands over the body of a female victim, then runs away. 5.1 A man exposes himself in public. 4.7 A person makes an obscene phone call. 1.9

Aggravated Assault 16.0 A person plants a bomb in a public building. The bomb explodes and one person is injured bur no medical treatment is required. 33.0 A person plants a bomb in a public building. The bomb explodes and 20 people are injured but no medical treatment is required. 30.5 A person intentionally shoots a victim with a gun. The victim requires hospitalization. 24.8 A parent beats his young child with his fists. The child requires hospitalization. 22.9 A person intentionally shoots a victim with a gun. The victim requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 19.0 A high school boy beats a middle-aged woman with his fists. She requires hospitalization. 19.5 A man beats his wife with his fists. She requires hospitalization. 18.3 A person stabs a victim with a knife. The victim requires hospitalization. 18.0 A person intentionally shoots a victim with a gun. The victim is wounded slightly and does not require medical treatment. 17.8 A high school boy beats an elderly woman with his fists. She requires hospitalization. 17.5 A person stabs a victim with a knife. The victim requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 17.1 A person attempts to kill a victim with a gun. The gun misfires and the victim escapes unharmed. 16.4 A teenage boy beats his mother with his fists. The mother requires hospitalization. 15.9

Offense Type Median A person intentionally injures a victim. The victim is treated by a doctor and hospitalized. 11.9 A man beats a stranger with his fists. He requires hospitalization. 11.8 A person stabs a victim with a knife. No medical treatment is required. 11.8 Ten high school boys beat a male classmate with their fists. He requires hospitalization. 11.7 Three high school boys beat a male classmate with their fists. He requires hospitalization. 11.3 A person intentionally hits a victim with a lead pipe. The victim requires hospitalization. 10.4 A person intentionally.hits a victim with a lead pipe. The Victim requires treatment by a doctor but no hospitalization. 8.9 A teenage boy beats his father with his fists. The father requires hospitalization. 7.9

Aggravated Assault (cont.) 16.0

A person intentionally hits a victim with a lead pipe. No medical treatment is required. 7.9 A person beats a victim with his fists. The victim requires hospitalization. 6.9

Robbery 9.0

A person robs a victim of $1000 at gunpoint. The victim is wounded and requires hospitalization. 21.0 A person robs a victim of $10 at gunpoint. The victim is wounded and requires hospitalization. 17.9 A person, armed with a gun, robs a bank of $100,000 during business hours. No one is physically hurt. 17.7 A person, using force, robs a victim of $1000. The victim is hurt and requires hospitalization. 16.8 A person, using force, robs a victim of $1000. The victim is hurt and requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 16.6 A person robs a victim of $1000 at gunpoint. The victim is wounded and requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 16.5 A person robs a victim of $10 at gunpoint. The victim is wounded and requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 15.7

Robbery (cont.) 9.0 A person, armed with a lead pipe robs a victim of $1000. The victim is injured and requires hospitalization. 15.6 A person, using force, robs a victim of $10. The victim is hurt and requires hospitalization. 14.6 A person, armed with a lead pipe, robs a victim of $1000. The victim is injured and requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 13.7 A person, armed with a lead pipe, robs a victim of $10. The victim is injured and requires hospitalization. 13.3 A person robs a victim of $1000 at gunpoint. No physical harm occurs. 9.7 A person breaks into a display case in a store and steals $1000 worth of merchandise. 9.7 A person robs a victim of $10 at gunpoint. No physical harm occurs. 9.4

A person, armed with a lead pipe, robs a victim of $1000. No physical harm occurs. 9.0 A person, using force, robs a victim of $1000. No physical harm occurs. 8.0 A person, armed with a lead pipe, robs a victim of $10. No physical harm occurs. 7.5 A person threatens a victim with a weapon unless the victim gives him money. The victim gives him $10 and is not harmed. 7.3 A person, armed with a lead pipe, robs a victim of $10. The victim is injured and requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 7.1 A person, using force, robs a victim of $10. The victim is hurt and requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 6.7 A person does not have a weapon. He threatens to harm a victim unless the victim gives him money. The victim gives him $10 and is not harmed. 6.6 A person threatens to harm a victim unless the victim gives him money. The victim gives him $10 and is not harmed. 5.4 A person, using force, robs a victim of $10. No physical harm occurs. 5.1 A person snatches a handbag containing $10 from a victim on the street. 4.9 A person picks a victim's pocket of $100. 4.4 A person robs a victim. The victim is injured but not hospitalized. 4.4 A person picks a victim's pocket of $10. 3.3 A person forces open a cash register in a department store and steals $10. 3.1

Motor Vehicle Theft 8.0 A person steals a locked car and sells it. 10.8 A person steals an unlocked car and sells it. 8.0 A person steals an unlocked car and later abandons it undamaged. 4.4

Other Assault 7.0 A man drags a woman into an alley, tears her clothes, but flees before she is physically harmed or sexually attacked. 16.9 A person threatens to seriously injure a victim. 9.3 A person intentionally injures a victim. The victim is treated by a doctor but is not hospitalized. 8.5 A person beats a victim with his fists. The victim is hurt but does not require medical treatment. 7.3 Because of a victim's race, a person injures a victim to prevent him from enrolling in a public school. No medical treatment is required. 6.8 A person beats a victim with his fists. The victim requires treatment by a doctor but not hospitalization. 6.2 A person intentionally shoves or pushes a victim. No medical treatment is required. 1.5

Theft from Auto 7.0 A person steals $1000 worth of merchandise from an unlocked car. 6.6

Burglary 6.0 A person breaks into a bank at night and steals $100,000. 15.5 A person breaks into a department store, forces open a safe, and steals $1000. 9.7 A person breaks into a school and steals equipment worth $1000. 9.7 A person breaks into a home and steals $1000. 9.6 A person breaks into a department store and steals merchandise worth $1000. 7.3 A person breaks into a public recreation center, forces open a cash box and steals $1000. 6.9

Burglary (cont.) 6.0 A person breaks into a public recreation center, forces open a cash box, and steals $10. 4.3 A person breaks into a department store, forces open a cash register, and steals $10. 3.3 A person breaks into a building and steals property worth $10. 3.2 A person breaks into a school and steals $10 worth of supplies. 3.1 A person breaks into a home and steals $100. 3.1 A person breaks into a department store and steals merchandise worth $10. 2.8

Other Theft 3.0 A person steals property worth $10,000 from outside a building. 10.9 A person walks into a public museum and steals a painting worth $1000. 9.7 A person trespasses in a railroad and steals tools worth $1000. 7.9 A person steals $1000 worth of merchandise from the counter of a department store. 7.6 A person steals property worth $1000 from outside a building. 6.9 A person steals property worth $100 from outside a building. 3.6 A person steals property worth $50 from outside a building. 2.9 A person trespasses in a city-owned storage lot and steals equipment worth $10. 2.2 A person steals $10 worth of merchandise from the counter of a department store. 2.2 A person steals property worth $10 from outside a building. 1.7 A person breaks into a parking meter and steals $10 worth of nickels. 1.6 A person trespasses in a railroad yard and steals a lantern worth $10. 1.4

#### References

Anyinam, C. (2015). Using risk terrain modeling technique to identify places with the greatest risk for violent crimes in New Haven. 2. Crime Mapping & Analysis News.

Ariel, B., Weinborn, C., & Sherman, L. W. (2016). “Soft” policing at hot spots – do police community support officers work? A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 12, 277–317.

Ashby, M. (2017). Comparing methods for measuring crime harm/severity. Policing. Journal of Policy Practice, pax049.

Babyak, C., Alavi, A., Collins, K., Halladay, A., & Tapper, D. (2009). The methodology of the police-reported crime severity index. Proceedings of the survey methods sectionVancouver, BC: Annual meeting of the statistical society of Canada 2009.

Bernasco, W., & Block, R. (2011). Robberies in Chicago: A block-level analysis of the influence of crime generators, crime attractors, and offender anchor points. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 48(1), 33–57.

Boivin, R. (2014). Prince George is not (and never was) Canada's most dangerous city:

Using police-recorded data for comparison of volume and seriousness of crimes. Social Indicators Research, 116, 899–907.

Braga, A. A. (2001). The effects of hot spots policing on crime. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 578, 104–125.

Braga, A. A. (2005). Hot spots policing and crime prevention: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1, 317–342 Braga, A. A., & Bond, B. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized

controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577–608.

Braga, A. A., Hureau, D. M., & Papachristos, A. V. (2011). An ex-post-facto evaluation framework for place-based police interventions. Final report submitted to the US Bureau of Justice AssistanceCambridge, MA: Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government.

Braga, A. A., Papachristos, A. V., & Hureau, D. M. (2014). The effects of hot spots policing on crime: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Justice Quarterly, 31, 633–663.

Braga, A. A., Weisburd, D., Waring, E., Mazerolle, L. G., Spelman, W., & Gajewski, F.

(1999). Problem-oriented policing in violent crime places: A randomized controlled

experiment. Criminology, 37, 541–580.

Brantingham, P. J., & Brantingham, P. L. (1984). Patterns in crime. New York: Macmillan. Brantingham, P. L., & Brantingham, P. J. (1995). Criminality of place: Crime generators

and crime attractors. European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, 3(3), 5–26.

Burton, S. E., Finn, M., Livingston, D., Scully, K., Bales, W. D., & Padgett, K. (2004). Applying a crime seriousness scale to measure changes in the severity of offenses by individuals arrested in Florida. Justice Research and Policy, 6(1), 1–18.

Caeti, T. (1999). Houston's targeted beat program: A quasi-experimental test of police patrol strategies (Ph.D. diss., sam houston state university). Ann Arbor, MI: UMI.

Chamlin, M. B., & Scott, S. E. (2014). Extending the hours of operation of alcohol serving establishments: An assessment of an innovative strategy to reduce the problems arising from the after-hours consumption of alcohol. Criminal Justice Policy Review, 25, 432–449

Clementi, F., & Gallegati, M. (2005). Pareto's law of income distribution: Evidence for Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Econophysics of wealth distributions (pp. 3–14). Milan, Italy: Springer.

Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity approach. American Sociological Review, 44(4), 588–608.

Cohen, J., Gorr, W., & Singh, P. (2003). Estimating intervention effects in varying risk settings: Do police raids reduce illegal drug dealing at nuisance bars? Criminology, 41, 257–292.

- Curtis-Ham, S., & Walton, D. (2017a). The New Zealand Crime Harm Index: Quantifying harm using sentencing data. Policing: Journal of Policy Practice, 12(4), 455–467.
- Curtis-Ham, S., & Walton, D. (2017b). Mapping crime harm and priority locations in New Zealand: A comparison of spatial analysis methods. Applied Geography, 86, 245–254.


Drawve, G., Thomas, S. A., & Walker, J. T. (2016). Bringing the physical environment back into neighborhood research: The utility of RTM for developing an aggregate neighborhood risk of crime measure. Journal of Criminal Justice, 44, 21–29.

Dugato, M. (2013). Assessing the validity of risk terrain modeling in a European city: Preventing robberies in Milan. Crime Mapping, 5(1), 63–89. Eck, J., Chainey, S., Cameron, J. C., Leitner, M., & Wilson, R. E. (2005). Mapping crime: Understanding hotspots. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice.

Eck, J. E., Clarke, R. V., & Guerette, R. T. (2007). Risky facilities: Crime concentration in homogenous sets of establishments and facilities. Crime Prevention Studies, 21, 225–264.

Hart, T. C., & Miethe, T. D. (2015). Configural behavior settings of crime event locations: Toward an alternative conceptualization of criminogenic microenvironments. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 52(3), 373–402.

House, P. D., & Neyroud, P. W. (2018). Developing a crime harm index for Western

Australia: The WACHI. Cambridge Journal of Evidence Based Policing, 2, 70–94. Ignatans, D., & Pease, K. (2016). Taking crime seriously: Playing the weighting game.

Policing, 10(3), 184–193.

Kinney, J. B., Brantingham, P. L., Wuschke, K., Kirk, M. G., & Brantingham, P. J. (2008). Crime attractors, generators, and detractors: Land use and urban crime opportunities. Built Environment, 34(1), 62–74.

Koper, C. S., Taylor, B. G., & Woods, D. J. (2013). A randomized test of initial and residual deterrence from directed patrols and use of license plate readers at crime hot spots. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 9, 213–244.

Kwan, Y. K., Ip, W. C., & Kwan, P. (2000). A crime index with Thurstone's scaling of crime severity. Journal of Criminal Justice, 28, 237–244.

Lawton, B., Taylor, R., & Luongo, A. (2005). Police officers on drug corners in Philadelphia, drug crime, and violent crime: Intended, diffusion, and displacement impacts. Justice Quarterly, 22, 427–451.

Lum, C., Hibdon, J., Cave, B., Koper, C. S., & Merola, L. (2011). License plate reader (LPR) police patrols in crime hot spots: An experimental evaluation in two adjacent jurisdictions. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7, 321–345.

Mayhew, B. H., & Levinger, R. L. (1976). Size and the density of interaction in human

aggregates. American Journal of Sociology, 82(1), 86–110. Mazerolle, L., Price, J., & Roehl, J. (2000). Civil remedies and drug control: A randomized field trial in Oakland, California. Evaluation Review, 24, 212–241.

National Research Council (2004). Fairness and effectiveness in policing: The evidence. In W. Skogan, & K. Frydl (Eds.). Committee on law and justice, division of behavioral and social sciences and education (Committee to Review Research on Police Policy and Practices). Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Ratcliffe, J. H., & Kikuchi, G. (2019). Harm-focused offender triage and prioritization: A Philadelphia case study. Policing: International Journal, 42(1), 59–73.

Ratcliffe, J., Taniguchi, T., Groff, E., & Wood, J. (2011). The Philadelphia foot patrol experiment: A randomized controlled trial of police patrol effectiveness in violent crime hot spots. Criminology, 49, 795–831

Rossi, P. H., Waite, E., Bose, C. E., & Berk, R. E. (1974). The seriousness of crimes: Normative structure and individual differences. American Sociological Review, 224–237.

Sherman, L., Buerger, M., & Gartin, P. (1989). Beyond dial-a-cop: A randomized test of repeat call policing (RECAP). Washington, DC: Crime Control Institute. Sherman, L. W., Gartin, P. R., & Buerger, M. E. (1989). Hot spots of predatory crime: Routine activities and the criminology of place. Criminology, 27, 27–55.

Sherman, L., Neyroud, P. W., & Neyroud, E. (2016). The Cambridge crime harm index: Measuring total harm from crime based on sentencing guidelines. Policing, 10(3), 171–183.

Sherman, L., & Rogan, D. (1995). Effects of gun seizures on gun violence: “Hot spots” patrol in Kansas city. Justice Quarterly, 12, 673–694. Sherman, L., & Weisburd, D. (1995). General deterrent effects of police patrol in crime hot spots: A randomized controlled trial. Justice Quarterly, 12, 625–648. Stylianou, S. (2003). Measuring crime seriousness perceptions: What have we learned and what else do we want to know. Journal of Criminal Justice, 31, 37–56 Sullivan, C., & Su-Wuen, O. (2012). Justice sector seriousness score (2012 update): FAQs. Wellington, NZ: Ministry of Justice. Sullivan, C., Su-Wuen, O., & McRae, R. (2017). Justice sector seriousness score (2016 update): FAQs. Wellington, NZ: Ministry of Justice.

Summers, L., & Caballero, M. (2017). Spatial conjunctive analysis of (crime) case configurations: Using Monte Carlo methods for significance testing. Applied Geography, 84, 55–63.

Sweeten, G. (2012). Scaling criminal offending. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 28(3), 533–557.

Taylor, B., Koper, C., & Woods, D. (2011). A randomized controlled trial of different policing strategies at hot spots of violent crime. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7, 149–181.

United States Sentencing Commission (Nov. 2016). Guidelines Manual, §3E1.1. Weinborn, C., Ariel, B., Sherman, L. W., & O'Dwyer, E. (2017). Hotspots vs. harmspots:

Shifting focus from counts to harm in the criminology of place. Applied Geography, 86, 226–244.

Weisburd, D. (2015). The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology, 53(2), 133–157 Weisburd, D., & Green, L. (1995). Policing drug hot Spots: The Jersey City DMA experiment. Justice Quarterly, 12, 711–736.

Weisburd, D., Wyckoff, L., Ready, J., Eck, J., Hinkle, J., & Gajewski, F. (2006). Does crime just move around the corner? A controlled study of spatial displacement and diffusion of crime control benefits. Criminology, 44, 549–592.

Wirth, L. (1938). Urbanism as a way of life. American Journal of Sociology, 44(1), 1–24. Wolfgang, M. E., Figlio, R. M., Tracy, P. E., & Singer, S. I. (1985). The national survey of

crime severity. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.

Wyant, B. R. (2008). Multilevel impacts of perceived incivilities and perceptions of crime risk on fear of crime: Isolating endogenous impacts. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 45(1), 39–64.

