Journal of Criminal Justice 31 (2003) 37–56

# Measuring crime seriousness perceptions: What have we learned and what else do we want to know

Stelios Stylianou*

Department of Sociology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

Abstract

Perceptions of crime seriousness have been studied since the 1960s. Based predominantly on data from surveys, researchers have identified characteristics of acts affecting seriousness perceptions and have examined the degree of consensus in perceived seriousness for a variety of deviant and criminal behaviors. Methodological issues (methods of measurement, questionnaire structure and content, level or measurement, etc.) have been discussed at length. This review presents the most important substantive and methodological accomplishments and challenges of this body of research. It also discusses possible future directions, including the establishment of connections to sociological theory and normative philosophy.

D 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction

The study of popular perceptions is an integral part of the study of social life. In criminological and criminal justice research, popular perceptions of the nature of criminal behavior and of crime as a social problem constitute an important area of investigation. The way people perceive crime is a central aspect of normative culture in general and formal social control in particular.

The study of perceptions of crime seriousness was introduced by Sellin and Wolfgang (1964)1 who presented an alternative way to measure crime seriousness. They argued that, to assess the seriousness of crime as a social problem, one should not only look at the prevalence of criminal behavior (reflected in crime rates), but also consider the nature of criminal acts (severity of victimization, cost for society, etc.). They

* Department of Liberal Arts, Intercollege, 46 Makedonitissas Avenue, PO Box 24005, 1700 Lefkosia, Cyprus. Tel.: +357-2-2841500; fax: +357-2-2357481.

E-mail address: stelios@u.washington.edu (S. Stylianou).

suggested that the widely used crime rates should be combined with measures of the seriousness of each criminal offense. Until then, the seriousness of each offense was decided by the legal experts. The classification of crimes in the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) is an example of such seriousness rating. Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) wanted to use an alternative measure of perceived seriousness, one that would reflect public opinion. This measure is the perceived seriousness of crime and it is obtained by the empirical measurement of perceptions. This measurement is the subject matter of the research tradition reviewed in the present study.

In the four decades that followed Sellin and Wolfgang’s prelude, numerous research contributions have been published, predominantly in criminology and criminal justice journals. The central theme addressed by this body of research is people’s perception of how serious particular deviant or criminal behaviors are. Typically, researchers have been interested in modeling seriousness perceptions based on theoretically or empirically identified characteristics or categories of acts. The issue of consensus (the extent of agreement among individuals or groups in

0047-2352/02/$ – see front matter D 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S0047-2352(02)00198-8

perceptions of seriousness) has also attracted attention. Inevitably, methodological issues about measurement and analysis have also been raised and researched.

Conceptualization: dimensions of perceived seriousness

A review of research must begin with a definition of the subject matter. In the present case, a standard definition of perceived seriousness of crime is not available in the literature. The adjective ‘‘serious’’ and the noun ‘‘seriousness’’ have been used, both in measurement instruments and in research reports, without formal specification of meaning. In fact, most studies are based on the assumption that such definition is not necessary. Rossi, Waite, Bose, and Berk (1974, p. 224) put it this way:

In many ways, seriousness as applied to criminal acts resembles prestige as applied to occupations or other social statuses: both terms resist precise abstract definition; both can be easily translated into operational forms through the use of sample surveys; both are important in empirical research; and both remain obstinately necessary in popular and vernacular vocabularies.

This view has been criticized (Blum-West, 1985; Lynch & Danner, 1993; Miethe, 1982). Miethe (1982), for example, argued that the assumption that seriousness is understood in the same way by all parties involved in the research process is shaky and that findings of research based on this assumption are of questionable validity. Such criticisms have been addressed indirectly at the level of conceptualization. Although a single definition is absent, the dimensions or components of perceived seriousness have been specified quite elaborately.

Many researchers have presented typologies of acts and have measured perceived seriousness for each type of act, assuming that the perceived seriousness is a function of the essential characteristics of each type (e.g., type of victimization). Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) presented a typology to capture the essential characteristics of 141 offenses. They began with a classification of all offenses into two classes. Class I included offenses that caused bodily harm and/ or property loss and/or property damage. All other offenses belong to Class II. Class I has three categories and Class II has seven categories. The categories were labeled from A to J; categories A, B, and C belong to Class I, and the rest to Class II. The classification was based on the assumption that the defining characteristic of each category could be

compared to those of the other categories and ranked in terms of a priori defined seriousness. Thus, category A had the most serious characteristic, bodily injury; category B did not have the defining characteristic of category A, but the next most serious, property loss; category C did not have the defining characteristics of categories A or B, but the next most serious, property damage; and so on. The resulting categories are presented in Table 1. To measure the extent to which this classification is reflected in popular perceptions, Sellin and Wolfgang asked samples of students, police officers, and judges to rate the behaviors in terms of seriousness. They found that the observed perceived seriousness of these categories reflects the a priori seriousness categorization quite well.

In another major study, Newman (1976) defined five categories of crimes and used nine acts to represent them. These are presented in Table 2.

Rossi et al. (1974) asked survey respondents to rate 140 acts in terms of seriousness. To infer the empirical meaning of seriousness, they categorized the offenses based on eleven characteristics. Each offense was placed in one category based on whether

Table 1 Sellin and Wolfgang’s typologya Class Category Defining characteristics

- I A Bodily injury
- I B Property theft
- I C Property damage


- II D Intimidation (to hurt person)
- II E Intimidation with property loss threatened
- II F Primary victimization only (involving a ‘‘personalized victim’’)
- II G Secondary victimization only: ‘‘secondary victimization generally refers to commercial establishments, such as department stores, railroads, theaters, chain stores, and churches. The victim is impersonalized but not diffusive as to include the community at large.’’
- II H Tertiary victimization only: ‘‘a very diffusive victimization that extends to the community at large and includes offenses against the public order, social harmony, or the administration of government.’’
- II I Mutual victimization only: ‘‘the participants engage in mutually consensual acts that are violations of the law, for example, fornication, adultery, or statutory rape.’’
- II J No victimization only: ‘‘‘juvenile status’ offenses.’’


a Adapted or quoted from Sellin and Wolfgang (1964).

Table 2 Newman’s typologya Category Representative acts Mala in se Incest Mala antiqua Robbery Mala prohibita Quasi crime:

Appropriation of public funds

Victimless crimes: Abortion in two months Homosexuality among adults Taking drugs

Mala nova Factory pollution Mala ambigua Not helping a person in dangerous

situation Public protest about one’s government

a Newman (1976).

it had the defining characteristic of the category or not. In their analysis, Rossi et al. tested the impact of each of these characteristics on perceived seriousness using a binary variable for each in regression equations predicting perceived seriousness. They found that these characteristics alone could explain 68 percent of the variation in perceived seriousness. McCleary, O’Neil, Epperlein, Jones, and Gray

- (1981) extended the implications of Rossi et al.’s findings to include twelve additional dimensions. The original (Rossi et al., 1974) and the added (McCleary et al., 1981) dimensions are presented in Table 3.


Pontell, Granite, Keenan, and Geis (1985) replicated Rossi et al.’s (1974) analysis based on data from a random sample of American chiefs of police. They used the same binary variables and found these to explain about 62 percent of the variation in seriousness ratings. A more formal approach in the study of dimensions of acts is the factorial survey design, presented by Rossi and Nock (1982). Rossi, Simpson, and Miller (1985) used this method to investigate the effects of characteristics of criminal acts (including type of crime, monetary loss, injury, the profile of the corporation in the case of organizational offending, offender–victim relationships, etc.) on perceptions of fairness of punishment. Later, Warr (1989) applied a more abstract and parsimonious conceptualization identifying just two independent predictors of seriousness: harmfulness and wrongfulness.

The identification of dimensions using the survey method has been criticized. Blum-West (1985) criticized the lack of specification of the term ‘‘seriousness,’’ as well as the survey method itself. In his own study, fifty individuals filled out typical seriousness questionnaires and, in addition, answered openended questions. Blum-West found that seriousness ratings were affected by imageries (stereotypes) about the crimes and in particular by eight factors: bodily hurt, economic damage, emotional damage, potential

for harm, intent, purpose, motive, and fair play. Hansel (1987) warned that ‘‘seriousness’’ is only one of a number of interrelated dimensions that form crime stereotypes. Using exploratory interviews, he obtained evidence for the existence of nine dimensions (in addition to seriousness), which he later measured using a survey. The dimensions were: actual harm, potential harm, self-harm, the degree to which a behavior is ‘‘sick,’’ the degree to which a crime is a ‘‘personal’’ matter, violence, immorality, and sex relatedness.

A number of studies focused on criminal intent as a dimension affecting perceived seriousness. Riedel

Table 3 Rossi et al.’s and McCleary et al.’s dimensionsa Number Description

- 1 Crimes against the person I: resulting in death (murder, manslaughter)
- 2 Crimes against the person II: resulting in grave injury (assault, rape, incest)
- 3 Crimes against the person III: all other crimes with actual or threatened injury
- 4 Crimes involving property I: resulting in loss of more than $25
- 5 Crimes involving property II: all other property crimes
- 6 Selling illegal drugs: heroin, LSD, marijuana, pep pills
- 7 ‘‘White collar’’ crimes: embezzlement, income tax cheating, fraud
- 8 ‘‘Victimless’’ crimes: prostitution, homosexuality
- 9 Subversion: crimes against the state (desertion, spying for enemy)
- 10 Crimes against the police: any crime against the police
- 11 Crimes against order: loitering, disturbing the peace
- 12 Crimes against judicial order: perjury, leaving scene of accident
- 13 Crimes where victim and offender are related
- 14 Crimes where victim and offender are acquaintances
- 15 Premeditated or calculated crimes
- 16 Impulsive crimes (absence of premeditation)
- 17 Negligent crimes (absence of intent)
- 18 Sex related crimes
- 19 Crimes where the victim is a minor
- 20 Crimes involving the use of a weapon
- 21 Crimes committed in the dwelling place of the victim
- 22 Crimes against corporate entities other than the government
- 23 Crimes committed knowingly, willfully, deliberately


a Dimensions one to eleven were used by Rossi et al. (1974, pp. 231–232). Dimensions twelve to twenty-three were added by McCleary et al. (1981, p. 283).

- (1975) applied an experimental design in a sample of university students and concluded that intent is in a sense a given in the scenarios used in surveys. His subjects were able to make inferences of intent and these inferences did not affect the seriousness judgments. This conclusion was later challenged theoretically (Sebba, 1984) and empirically (Fishman, Kraus, & Cohen, 1986).


Populations, measurement, and methodological findings

Populations and methods of measurement

The extent to which this variation damages the validity and comparability of seriousness measurements is unknown. It seems that, at least in some cases, survey participants’ responses can be significantly affected by the degree of elaboration of the offense scenario. Vogel (1998), for example, reported that her sample of African Americans in Atlanta rated the killing of a police officer as less wrongful than a variety of acts including prostitution and fixing books. She justified this unusual finding based on her scenarios, which were ‘‘richly detailed and included provocative (and in two cases racially charged) circumstances’’ (p. 233). The description of killing an officer was definitely provocative:

Ideally, the measurement of popular perceptions requires the use or probability samples from the general population. The literature reviewed here includes some studies based on such samples, but also many others based on nonprobability samples of general or special populations, including students, police officers, correctional staff, victimized citizens, etc. The single most popular population sampled was university students. Systematic information about populations and sample sizes is found in Appendix A.

Appendix A also contains information about the methods of measurement used in empirical studies. The vast majority of studies used the survey method. Some researchers used experimental designs in administering the surveys (Miethe, 1991; Riedel, 1975) and exploratory or in-depth interviews (Blum-West, 1985; Hansel, 1987). Typically, survey participants were given questionnaires containing a number of behaviors and were asked to state how serious each behavior was according to their opinion. The number of acts included in the questionnaire for each study is reported in Appendix A. The type of scale used in the surveys is also reported in Appendix A (and discussed later in the Level of Measurement section).

Offense scenarios

In the survey method, participants were given a list of behaviors and they were asked to rank or rate them in terms of seriousness using given scales. The number of acts included in existing studies varied from 1 to over 200 (see Appendix A). The description of each act was called an ‘‘offense scenario.’’ The degree of elaboration of offense scenarios in the surveys varied from item to item within each survey and more widely from survey to survey. Compare for example ‘‘incest’’ (Newman, 1976) with ‘‘The offender stabs a victim with a knife [and] the victim is treated by a physician but requires no further treatment’’ (Sellin & Wolfgang, 1964).

A young African American male kills a Caucasian policeman after the policeman calls him names (uses racial slurs) and threatens to blow his (the African American’s) brains out. (Vogel, 1998, p. 230)

Lynch and Danner (1993) argued that scenarios used in surveys were not inclusive of all factors affecting seriousness perceptions. According to these authors, even systematic approaches, such as the factorial approach developed by Rossi and Nock (1982), suffered from this type of invalidity. The alternative method suggested by Lynch and Danner was a variation of the ‘‘hedonic price index’’ used in economics. In crime seriousness surveys, this approach requires a sample with victimization experience (which can be obtained from victimization surveys). The victims are asked to say how ‘‘upsetting’’ an event was for them. ‘‘Upsettingness’’ is then regressed on characteristics of the criminal event (measured in the victimization survey) and the impact of each characteristic is assessed. To illustrate this technique, Lynch and Danner used data from the Washington Metropolitan Area Survey (1985) and compared their results to those of the National Survey of Crime Severity (Wolfgang, Figlio, Tracy, & Singer, 1985). They found little correspondence in the results. They concluded that this was due to the exclusion in Wolfgang et al. (1985) of factors such as the presence of the victim, the location of the event (private–public), the offender–victim relationship, the number of offenders involved, etc.

That the scenario method is of uncertain validity should not surprise. All social scientific models of substance or measurement are inevitably partial. Seriousness perceptions research has identified a long list of factors affecting perceived seriousness and no single study has ever incorporated all these factors in one model. Even if a study did this, the critique of partiality would still hold, since it is axiomatic that there can always be additional factors affecting individual judgments.

Questionnaire structure

Two issues have been raised regarding the structure of questionnaires used in survey research on perceptions of crime seriousness: questionnaire form (whether each question is printed on a separate page or with other questions) and item context (the order in which questions are listed on the questionnaire). Sheley (1980) reported that neither of these two factors had an effect on judgments of seriousness. Evans and Scott (1982), on the other hand, questioned the finding about item context. Using questionnaires with rotating items in a survey of undergraduate students, they concluded that the context of each item could explain an amount of variation in the rankings equal to the amount of variation explained by demographic characteristics. This finding casts doubt not only on the issue of item context, but also on the validity of the survey method itself. Again, these issues are not unique to crime seriousness research.

Level of measurement

The description of acts on a survey questionnaire is one part of the task of operationalization. The other is to provide survey participants with a scale on which they will place each behavior according to how serious they think it is. Three types of measurement scales have been used in seriousness research (see Appendix A). The most prevalent is category scaling (ordinal level). Participants are asked to rank a number of given behaviors, typically on a semantic differential scale from ‘‘least serious’’ to ‘‘most serious.’’ The second most popular scale is magnitude estimation (ratio level). Participants are asked to rate the behaviors, i.e., to assign a numerical value of seriousness to each, based on a given reference rating of a common offense. For example, Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) used automobile theft with a value of ten as the reference rating and asked respondents to rate the rest of the offenses from zero to infinity based on how many times more or less serious than automobile theft they thought an act was. Finally, a less frequently used scale is paired comparison (Thurstone & Chave, 1929). In this, the offenses are coupled randomly in a large number of dyads and the respondents are asked to say which of the two offenses in each dyad is more serious. The number of times an offense is judged as more serious than another is a measure of that offense’s seriousness.2

Methodological issues regarding the choice of scale have been raised from the beginning. Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) used both category and magnitude scales for comparison. They found that the

category scale is a logarithmic function of the magnitude scale. They suggested that the magnitude scale is preferable primarily because it is ‘‘a product of the rater rather than the experimenter’’ (p. 272). This finding was widely confirmed (Bridges & Lisagor, 1975; Evans & Scott, 1984; Figlio, 1975; Rossi & Henry, 1980; Wolfgang et al., 1985).

To assess the similarity of these two methods, Miethe (1991) compared the measurement qualities of magnitude estimation and categorical scaling in a study involving two experiments, one in which the dependent variable was seriousness and one in which the dependent variable was values. Using the test–retest method, Miethe found that the magnitude scale is slightly less reliable than categorical scaling for both seriousness and values (the magnitude scale had a slightly smaller discriminatory power). With respect to the mathematical relationship between the two scaling methods, Miethe showed that the logarithmic function holds with respect to seriousness but not with respect to values. A critique of the use of magnitude estimation, referring particularly to its use by Wolfgang et al. (1985), came from Parton, Hansel, and Stratton (1991) who warned that magnitude estimation scales require training of the participants. They also warned that results should be interpreted cautiously based on the mathematical properties of the method. Regarding the method of paired comparison, Walker (1978) presented a test of consistency in which the results of paired comparison were consistent with the two other methods.

Another issue was raised by Fishman et al. (1986), who cautioned that the task of ranking a large number of offenses might be difficult for a person with average intelligence. These researchers presented a modified ranking method in which the respondents first distributed offenses in groups of similar offenses (the criteria for this grouping and the number of groups were left to the subjective judgment of the respondents) and then ranked the groups in order of seriousness. Finally, another problem was identified at the level of analysis. This occurs when ordinal data are analyzed as if they were interval data (a conventionally accepted violation of the assumptions of the ordinal scale). O’Connell and Whelan (1996) cautioned that analyses based on different assumptions can produce different results for some demographic groups.

In conclusion, the reliability and comparability of the two prevalent methods (category scaling and magnitude estimation) is well supported in the literature. The critical observation that these should be used carefully and always with respect to their mathematical properties is important, yet, not unique or detrimental in the study of crime seriousness.

Additivity

Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) generally assumed that the magnitude estimation scores of a multiple offense (an act involving more than one offense committed by the same person) or a repeated offense (an offense committed repeatedly by the same person) would be empirically equivalent to the sum of the scores of the single offenses. Using original items from Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) and modified items to include multiple offenses/offenders, Wellford and Wiatrowski

- (1975) found strong support for this claim in a sample of students at Florida State University.


The additivity assumption was challenged by Pease, Ireson, and Thorpe (1974), based on their finding that only about 32 percent of their sample judged the commission of two identical offenses twice as serious as the single offense. It was also challenged by Wagner and Pease (1978), who reported that their student sample judged 63.5 percent of coupled offenses as equally serious to a single offense. Gottfredson, Young, and Laufer (1980) also questioned the assumption of additivity based on two studies of university students. The first study showed that offense seriousness ratings are affected by monetary loss (ten amounts from $5 to $10,000 were tested) and type of crime (five property crimes were included: burglary, check fraud, robbery, theft, and vandalism), as well as by the interaction term (Monetary Loss Type of Crime). In the second study, dollar-value loss specifications for robbery and rape were added (multiple offense specification). The results supported the conclusions of the first study. The statistical significance of the interactive term damages the assumption of additivity.

The issue of additivity remains unresolved. It seems that a good deal of subjective judgment on behalf of the researchers is involved in making conclusions based on empirical findings. In their discussion about additivity, Wolfgang et al. (1985) concluded that, although the assumption does not absolutely meet the empirical findings, in practice, the discrepancy is minimal.

Substantive findings: dimensions of perceived seriousness

We now turn to the substantive findings of seriousness perceptions research. Findings regarding two characteristics of acts that affect perceived seriousness (consequences and wrongfulness) are discussed first, followed by findings regarding the issue of consensus. The review of findings concludes with the presentation of the most important correlates of perceived seriousness. The key substantive (as well as methodological)

findings of the empirical studies reviewed in this presentation are listed in Appendix A.

The substantive findings of crime seriousness research are very hard to summarize for two reasons. First, studies in this area have dealt with a wide variety of conceptual elements (see section on conceptualization). Second, most studies included large numbers of offenses (see Appendix A), resulting in many complications when studies are compared or summarized together. These complications should perhaps be reported here as the first summary finding. Beyond these problems, some empirical generalizations can be made from this literature. The most important of these is that perceived seriousness is a function of two factors: the perceived consequences and the perceived wrongfulness of an act.

Perceived seriousness as a function of perceived consequences

The most important characteristic associated with perceived seriousness of an act is the act’s perceived consequences: violent behaviors (causing bodily harm) are generally perceived as the most serious, followed by property offenses (causing property loss or property damage). This conclusion has been confirmed by virtually all studies and acknowledged by all summaries of findings of seriousness perceptions research (illustrative examples are Cullen, Link, & Polanzi, 1982; Douglas & Ogloff, 1997; Evans & Scott, 1984; McCleary et al., 1981; Rossi et al., 1974; Rossi & Henry, 1980; Schrager & Short, 1980; Scott & Al-Thakeb, 1980; Sellin & Wolfgang, 1964; Warr, 1989; Wolfgang et al., 1985). Wolfgang et al. (1985), in particular, derived magnitude estimation severity scores for 204 offenses ranked by 60,000 participants who received twenty-five-item questionnaires with the National Crime Survey in 1977. They found that the consequences of a crime affected the ratings strongly (same offenses with different consequences were rated significantly different) and that seriousness was higher for violent than for property crimes.

White-collar violations are subject to the same rule: their perceived seriousness varies with their consequences. Schrager and Short (1980) used data from Rossi et al. (1974) to investigate hypotheses concerning the nature of harm (economic versus physical) resulting from organizational crimes. They found that perceived seriousness is greater for organizational crimes involving physical harm than for those involving economic harm; that physical harm and economic harm are separate factors in the ratings of organizational crimes; and that organizational crimes and common crimes with comparable impact are rated similarly. Cullen et al. (1982) replicated Rossi et al.’s study with a special interest in the

distinction between white-collar crime and other offenses. These researchers mailed Rossi et al.’s questionnaire to a random sample of Macomb, Illinois residents (excluding university students). They found that, for white-collar crime, variation was associated primarily with the type of harm: offenses resulting in physical harm were rated more serious. They also found that the average seriousness ratings of white-collar offenses increased over time more than those of other offenses (compared to the ratings reported by Rossi et al., 1974).

Consistently, victimless crimes are generally rated the least serious. This category, however, does not seem to form a unidimensional factor. Abrams and Della-Fave (1976), for example, asked students in an undergraduate introductory sociology class for their opinion about legalization of abortion, homosexuality between consenting adults, prostitution, gambling, and drug use. In a factor analysis of the data, each behavior loaded on its own factor. A particular category of victimless crimes is behaviors with a strong ‘‘moral’’ element. The moral aspect of behavior is explored in more detail next.

Perceived seriousness as a function of perceived wrongfulness

Many behaviors without negative consequences are still negatively sanctioned. Victimless crimes are still crimes and they can be judged as more or less serious based on the extent to which they violate the moral standards of society. Victimizing behaviors too, are perceived as less or more serious based not only on their victimizing consequences, but also on the extent to which they are wrong in a moral sense.

Warr (1989) investigated the effect of harmfulness and wrongfulness on seriousness perceptions using data from a mail survey of Dallas, Texas residents. He asked respondents to rate thirty-one offenses with respect to three separate dimensions: seriousness, wrongfulness, and harmfulness. To analyze the data, Warr divided the respondents a posteriori in two groups. The first group was labeled ‘‘nondiscriminators’’ and it included 25 percent of the total usable sample. These respondents expressed their ‘‘principled disagreement with the proposition that crimes vary in their moral gravity’’ (p. 800). In this group, seriousness was highly correlated with harmfulness (wrongfulness was constant). Analysis of data from the rest of the respondents (labeled ‘‘discriminators’’) yielded three empirical categories of behaviors: crimes that are more harmful than wrong, crimes that are more wrong than harmful, and crimes that are equally wrong and harmful. For this group, seriousness depended on wrongfulness more than on harmfulness for crimes that were perceived as more wrong

than harmful and on harmfulness more than on wrongfulness for crimes that were perceived as more harmful than wrong. Warr concluded that ‘‘[r]ather than combining wrongfulness and harmfulness in some manner, these respondents [discriminators] appear to attend to the dominant feature of the crime—either its wrongfulness or its harmfulnessin judging seriousness’’ (p. 810).

Curry (1996) extended Warr’s (1989) analysis showing that the moral polarization expressed by ‘‘nondiscriminators’’ is associated with conservative Protestant beliefs. Warr’s results were also confirmed by O’Connell and Whelan (1996), who identified ‘‘badness’’ and ‘‘individual impact’’ as two factors underlying perceptions of seriousness. In addition, Blum-West (1985) concluded that the moral aspects of an act (for example, the motive and purpose of the offender and the fairness of the act) influence perceived seriousness beyond perceptions of physical or economic harm.

Consensus

To what degree is there agreement among individuals and groups in seriousness perceptions? To answer this question, it is necessary to define different types of consensus. The typology presented next contains the most important types of consensus. It is based predominantly on Rossi and Berk (1985). Some terms have been used by other researchers and some terms are borrowed from other sources, such as Cullen, Link, Travis, and Wozniak (1985) and Miethe (1984).

Absolute and relative consensus

This distinction is based on the mathematical properties of the distribution of seriousness scores. Absolute consensus refers to agreement among groups on the parameters of the distribution. Theoretically, two groups are in absolute consensus if they rate a behavior with exactly the same average score. In reality, absolute consensus is reported if the scores are approximately equal. Relative consensus refers to agreement among groups on the mathematical form (function) of the distribution. Relative consensus exists when the rank order of seriousness produced by two groups is the same (e.g., murder ranked as more serious than burglary in both groups). It does not require the same average scores.

Relative consensus is one of the most persistent findings in crime seriousness research (see also Cullen et al., 1985; Rossi & Henry, 1980). This holds even under the weight of some methodological criticisms.3 Behaviors on the upper end of the seriousness scale produce more consensus, even cross-

culturally (Newman, 1976). Victimless crimes, on the other hand, produce more dissensus (Carlson & Williams, 1993; Evans & Scott, 1984; Miethe, 1984; Newman, 1976). This conclusion reflects the consensus-conflict debate in criminology (Bernard, 1983), which is based on the distinction of crimes in mala en se and mala prohibita (Hagan, 1994, Chapter 1; Hagan, Silva, & Simpson, 1977).

ratings of thirty-one respondents, Carlson and Williams identified four such viewpoints: a class based viewpoint (reflecting a conflict view), a viewpoint showing tolerance for government crimes and intolerance for crimes against business, a moralist viewpoint (sex and drugs rated serious), and a viewpoint showing intolerance for corruption and deception involving government officials.

Global and local consensus

Global consensus refers to agreement on all normative domains, while local consensus refers to agreement on one domain. Two or more groups are in global consensus when their seriousness ratings are the same (in absolute or relative terms) for all behavioral categories. Local consensus is reported when the seriousness ratings of two or more groups are the same (in absolute or relative terms) for a single behavioral category (e.g., marijuana use). Local consensus is a more frequent finding than global consensus.

Miethe (1984) summarized the conclusions of empirical research in four types of consensus based on the two dimensions presented thus far: the absolute–relative and the global–local. Using data from Rossi et al. (1974), Miethe tested four corresponding hypotheses of consensus between Blacks and Whites. He found support for global relative consensus but not for global absolute consensus. Local relative consensus was observed for violent, white-collar, and victimless crimes and local absolute consensus for violent, white-collar, and public order offenses. For property crimes, he found neither absolute nor relative consensus. Miethe further showed that part of the consensus is attributable to consensus on the extremes and consensus about serious acts. Some of these findings were challenged by Cullen et al. (1985), who directed attention back to Miethe’s (1982) methodological criticisms. Reanalyzing Cullen et al.’s

- (1982) data, Cullen et al. (1985) found low absolute consensus and a strong impact of demographic variables (size of community of origin and education). They showed that the removal of serious crimes from the list does not affect consensus significantly. With respect to local consensus, Cullen et al. (1985) reported the presence of relative and the absence of absolute consensus. In addition, consensus tended to be stronger for some crimes (e.g., crimes against the police) than for other crimes (e.g., white-collar crimes).


Carlson and Williams (1993) proposed an alternative method of identifying local consensus. Instead of factor-analyzing variables, this method (labeled ‘‘Q-methodology’’) factor-analyzes cases, i.e., respondents. The factors extracted are viewpoints and the cases loading high on each factor represent a group sharing this viewpoint. In their analysis of

Aggregate and individual levels of consensus

Without exception, perceptions of crime seriousness have been measured at the individual level. With individuals as units of measurement, two possibilities for analysis exist: to use individuals (individual level variables) or groups (group means) as units of analysis. Consensus observed in the former case is called individual level consensus and in the latter case aggregate consensus. The comparison of groups has been the most popular. Most studies cited in this review contain aggregate comparisons between demographic and other groups at various levels of statistical sophistication, from simple nonparametric tests to regression models. As expected, aggregate level analyses produced findings of higher consensus (Miethe, 1984).

In general, at the aggregate level, there is relative consensus across groups. From the beginning of the story, Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) reported relative consensus across their samples. In a replication study in Canada, Akman and Normandeau (1968) also found relative consensus across different samples (students, judges, police officers, and white-collar workers). This conclusion was confirmed by Rossi et al. (1974) who reported relative consensus across race, sex, and educational level, while also showing that Blacks and females rate offenses as more serious overall. McCleary et al. (1981) also reported consensus between samples of criminal justice agents and citizens from the general population. Rossi and Henry (1980) concluded that seriousness research has generally shown relative consensus among groups.

Intracultural, crosscultural, and historical consensus

Three types of consensus can be defined based on the units of comparison. First, intracultural consensus refers to the degree of agreement among groups in the same society. Intracultural relative consensus has been the typical finding in seriousness research. In general, every study done within the limits of a single culture has produced findings that are the same or very similar in relative terms to those of every other study within the same limits.

Second, crosscultural consensus refers to the degree of agreement among samples from different

societies. The earliest replication of Sellin and Wolfgang’s (1964) study was done in Canada (Akman & Normandeau, 1968). Its general conclusions were highly consistent with Sellin and Wolfgang. As an illustration, the aggregate Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the relative seriousness scores of Sellin and Wolfgang’s USA sample and those of the Canadian sample in Akman and Normandeau (1968) was .96.

A number of studies followed in the early 1970s showing both agreement and disagreement across cultures. Carss and Whitrod (1974) compared perceptions of seriousness in Australia and Papua-New Guinea. Principal components factor analysis of their data yielded five factors. The first was compounded stealing (theft with some specification of the social position of the actor). Offenses that loaded high on this factor were rated more serious by the Papua-New Guinea sample. Offenses loading high on the second (violence) and third (civil disorder) factors were rated more serious by the Australian sample. Offenses that loaded high on the fourth (homosexuality) and fifth (stealing by inferiors) factors were rated the same. Hsu’s (1973) findings in a study in Taiwan were consistent with USA findings with respect to relative consensus, but not with respect to absolute consensus. The only exception in the relative consensus findings was rape, which was rated more serious than murder by Taiwanese females.

In a large-scale comparative study, Newman

- (1976) reported comparisons among six countries (India, Indonesia, Iran, Italy, USA, and Yugoslavia) with respect to a number of issues including the perceived seriousness of nine offenses. Aggregate comparisons (country averages) showed relative consensus among the six countries. Incest, robbery, and appropriation were overall rated the most serious, while homosexuality, abortion, and public protest the least serious. Acts rated as most serious had the highest degree of consensus while those rated the least serious produced the highest degree of variation (incest behaved somewhat differently). The degree of individual level consensus around the country averages varied dramatically across behaviors and across cultures. In general, for robbery and incest, these deviations were low. Drugs, homosexuality, abortion, not helping, and protest, on the other hand, produced larger deviations and were rated by most respondents as either very low or very high on the seriousness scale.


Other studies have also produced mixed results. Kvalseth (1980) studied a Norwegian sample of twenty-five college students. He found relative consensus as compared to a USA sample (Stevens, 1975) and a Canadian sample (Akman & Normandeau, 1968) but not absolute consensus (the Norwegian

sample produced higher averages on the seriousness scale). Scott and Al-Thakeb (1980) studied the perceived seriousness of violent, property, economic, drug, and sex offenses in the USA, Kuwait, and six Western European countries. They found remarkable overall relative consensus; however, some exceptions did appear (e.g., sexual offenses were rated more serious in Kuwait). Evans and Scott (1984) studied Kuwait in comparison to the USA. In general, they found relative consensus between the two samples with respect to the seriousness of three categories of offenses (violent, property, and white-collar crimes). Offenses in a fourth category, ‘‘morals offenses’’ (Evans & Scott, 1984, p. 47), were perceived as much more serious in Kuwait. Relative consensus in the ratings of American and Chinese students was also found by Yu (1993). In absolute local terms, the Chinese students rated victimless crimes (taking drugs, homosexuality, prostitution, pornography, and gambling) and public order offenses as more serious, while American students rated violent offenses as more serious. White-collar offenses showed small or inconsistent differences. Finally, O’Connell and Whelan (1996), using ten offense scenarios, found consensus between the ratings of their Irish sample and those of a previously studied British sample (Levi & Jones, 1985).

In conclusion, relative consensus seems to exist cross-culturally with respect to behaviors that are generally ranked high on the seriousness scales. As discussed earlier, these offenses are typically those involving bodily injury, followed by those causing property damage or loss. Significant variation is observed for offenses ranked as less serious and offenses that have culturally specific meanings.

A third type of consensus with respect to the units of comparison is historical consensus. This refers to consensus in the same society over time. Ideally, the empirical exploration of this concept requires longitudinal data, which are not available. Still, it is possible to compare the empirical findings of a given study to those of previous studies of similar populations. Figlio (1975) compared his findings to Sellin and Wolfgang’s (1964) findings (both studies sampled University of Pennsylvania students), and found that his sample rated offenses about 50 percent lower on the seriousness scale in absolute terms (absence of absolute consensus) but very similar in relative terms (presence of relative consensus). O’Connell and Whelan (1996) compared their findings in Ireland with findings of a previous study in the UK. They found that the perceived seriousness of marijuana sale, dole fraud, and underage sex changed over time much more than the perceived seriousness of other offenses. This replicated the findings of Deschner, Plain, Terhune, and Williamson (1981) who reported that the

only major value shift over the previous two decades occurred for drug offense ratings, especially for marijuana.

In conclusion, these results generally suggest that there is relative but not absolute consensus over time within the same groups and/or normative domains (for the same summary conclusion, see Rossi & Henry, 1980). It is important to stress that there is more variation for victimless and less serious behaviors.

Correlates of seriousness perceptions

The previous section focused on the degree of agreement in perceptions of crime seriousness. We now turn to the remaining disagreement. What is this variation a result of? Some amount of variation can be explained by correlates of perceived seriousness. The most important of these are presented in this section.

Demographic correlates

As reported in the previous section, relative consensus has been detected across all demographic groups. Empirical analyses have generally shown that only a small amount of the remaining variation can be explained by demographic correlates. This conclusion was first reported by Sellin and Wolfgang (1964). In his analysis of data from six countries, Newman

- (1976) also illustrated this point: age, gender, education, social class, urbanness, and religiosity (an attitudinal correlate, discussed in the next section) explained only about 10 percent of the variance (and about 40–45 percent combined with country effects) in his deviance perception and deviance control variables. A few examples of studies concerned with the effects of specific demographic correlates are presented below.


With respect to gender, some differences were observed for behaviors that disproportionately affect women. For example, females in Akman and Normandeau (1968) and Hsu (1973) rated rape as significantly more serious. Differences were also reported by Walker (1978) who found that males consider violent behaviors more serious and tax evasion less serious, by Rauma (1991) who found that females make harsher judgments for assaults and burglaries, by Yu (1993) who found that females in the USA and China generally tend to rate offenses more serious, and by O’Connell and Whelan (1996) who found that females consider underage sex, marijuana sale, and fraud more serious. On the other hand, Newman (1976) and Wolfgang et al. (1985) found no overall differences across genders.

Rossi et al. (1974) reported that young age correlated with overall seriousness ratings: young

persons tended to rate offenses similar to the sample average rating. In Newman’s (1976) comparative study, age had a minor culture-specific significant effect. Wolfgang et al. (1985) reported that older people rated thefts of large amounts higher than did young people. O’Connell and Whelan (1996) reported that age had a significant, yet unclear effect on seriousness perceptions.

In Rossi et al.’s (1974) study, education was also correlated with overall seriousness ratings: the more educated participants tended to rate offenses similar to the sample average. The researchers’ interpretation was that young and educated people know the normative structure better and can handle language more reliably. Newman (1976) reported that the more educated respondents rated behaviors less serious and were less likely to approve formal control policies for all acts except homosexuality and in all countries of his study except Indonesia. Rauma (1991) also found education to have a negative effect on perceived seriousness.

Other demographic correlates of seriousness perceptions include location (urban versus rural), race, and socioeconomic status. Newman (1976) found that urbaneness had a negative effect on deviance perceptions for homosexuality, abortion, and protest, except in Indonesia where it had a positive effect. Hagan et al. (1977) found that urbanites are more likely to approve of homosexuality, while rural residents are more likely to approve of assault. Overall, there is relative consensus between races (typically, the comparisons are between Blacks and Whites). The direction of dissensus has been shown to go either way: Wolfgang et al. (1985) found that minorities score lower than Whites, while Rauma (1991) reports that Blacks are harsher in their judgments. In comparing African Americans’ to White Americans’ perceptions, Vogel (1998) suggested that the motive of the offender and the relations between the offender’s racial group and the police may influence seriousness perceptions. Socioeconomic status was associated with seriousness ratings in Walker (1978) but not in Newman, while Hagan et al. (1977) found a positive association between higher social status and approval of homosexuality.

Reference can also be made to some variables that are not strictly demographic. For example, some studies compared seriousness perceptions of persons under legal supervision to those of the general public. A general conclusion of these studies is that there is relative but not absolute consensus. This was observed in a comparison between ratings of inmates and staff members at a correctional institution (Sechrest, 1969) and among ratings of inmates, detainees, and students (Figlio, 1975). A complementary question is whether criminal justice officials have different perceptions

compared to the general public. Roth (1978) compared perceptions of seriousness of assistant prosecutors in twenty-three prosecutor’s offices to those of samples from previous studies (Figlio, 1975; Sellin & Wolfgang, 1964) andfoundrelative consensus. Pontell et al. (1985) compared perceptions of police chiefs to those of the general public (Rossi et al., 1974) and found overall relative consensus. In the same study, absolute consensus was also observed for most offenses (sale and use of heroin produced the largest dissensus). Levi and Jones (1985) compared the seriousness perceptions of two samples, one from the police and one from the public and found consensus on some offenses (e.g., violence and theft by a police officer), but dissensus on other offenses (e.g., fraud, burglary, and victimless crimes). In a comparison of police and public attitudes toward traffic offenses, Corbett and Simon (1991) also found overall relative consensus. The ratings of the two samples approached absolute consensus for the more serious offenses (e.g., drunk driving). The public sample, however, showed a tendency to rate the least serious behaviors more serious than the police sample. Finally, Wolfgang et al. (1985) reported that respondents with victimization experience perceived offenses as more serious than did respondents without such experience and that the relationship of the victim to the offender affected the ratings. Contrary to Wolfgang et al. (1985) however, Levi and Jones (1985) did not find any differences between victims and nonvictims.

Attitudinal correlates

It is reasonable to expect attitudinal correlates to be more closely related to seriousness perceptions, since attitudes and perceptions are conceptually related at the psychological level. Indeed, some attitudes or attitudinal constructs have been empirically confirmed as strong correlates of perceptions of seriousness.

One of the most important of these correlates is religiosity. Newman (1976) found religiosity to have the most important conservative (favorable to deviance control) effect on all acts in four of the six countries of his study.4 Orthodox Christian belief was reported by Abrams and Della-Fave (1976) to explain together with authoritarianism (discussed next) about 23 percent of the variance in support of legalization of victimless crimes. Individually, each accounted for 16 percent of the variance, half of which was unique, the other half shared. In their study in Kuwait, AlThakeb and Scott (1981) found that upper or upper– middle class citizens tended to be against the reestablishment of Islamic penal law. The reason, according to the authors, is not social class per se but the fact that these groups, which constitute a minority in most Middle Eastern Islamic countries, are generally less orthodox in their religious beliefs and are more

exposed to the Western civilization. Similarly, Evans and Scott (1984) showed that morals offenses were rated much more serious in Kuwait than in the USA and argued that this can be explained by religious differences. According to these authors, an important difference is the specification in Islamic religion of a special category of serious offenses, known as ‘‘Alhuddoud offenses.’’ These are ‘‘offenses that are specified in the Koran or in the teachings of the Prophet Muhammed’’ (Evans & Scott, 1984, p. 50). With respect to Protestantism, Curry (1996) reported an association between moral polarization and conservative Protestant beliefs.

A second attitudinal construct that correlates with perceived seriousness is authoritarianism, that is, ‘‘an orientation [that favors] subjection to the control and hegemony of powerful social and legal institutions and is opposed to individual autonomy and normative diversity’’ (Mentor & Dorne, 1998, p. 77).5 Abrams and Della-Fave (1976) found authoritarianism a strong correlate of condemnation of victimless crimes. More recently, Feather (1996) surveyed two samples in Australia to investigate the correlates of perceived seriousness for domestic violence, plagiarism, shoplifting, and resisting a police order in a protest against lodging. He found a direct positive effect of authoritarianism on perceived seriousness. Mentor and Dorne (1998) asked university students enrolled in a public policy program to rate a variety of deviant acts (consensus crimes were almost entirely excluded) hypothesizing that perceived seriousness was affected by authoritarianism. They found a positive effect of authoritarianism on perceived seriousness. They also showed that political ideology, church attendance, and gender did not have a significant effect on perceived seriousness after controlling for authoritarianism.

A similar personality construct is dogmatism. It represents a closed and rigid way of thinking and a lack of tolerance for alternative beliefs. The highly dogmatic person ‘‘tends to equate information with its source, sees the world as threatening, and evaluates over people in terms of the apparent compatibility of their beliefs with his own’’ (Fleming, 1981, p. 55; based on Rokeach, 1960). Fleming (1981) reported that dogmatism produced variation in judgments of acts that have unclear consequences (little certainty about harm or damage) among members of otherwise homogenous groups (in this case, a sample of undergraduate students from four colleges in Philadelphia).

What else do we want to know?

In this last section, a few ideas regarding directions for future research and application are out-

lined. To begin with, there are several research questions already addressed in the literature that require more systematic investigation. Cross-cultural comparisons, for example, have been reported only in a few studies, and only two studies have compared more than two cultures (Newman, 1976; Scott & Al-Thakeb, 1980). Even for issues that have been extensively investigated, there is still more knowledge to be obtained. Additional research questions regarding these issues are implied in the above parts and will not be repeated here. This last part will focus on four matters that have received only occasional attention.

First, there is a pressing need for establishing a connection of this body of scholarship to sociological theory. Although the concept of crime seriousness has important analytical advantages, its theoretical relevance has not been well demonstrated. In a review of possible connections of the findings of the first two decades of crime seriousness research to mainstream sociological theories, Rossi and Henry (1980) concluded that there is a ‘‘distressing lack of theoretical base for crime seriousness’’ (p. 497). Theoretical discussion in the area is limited, if not entirely missing, until today. A possible explanation for this lack of systematic theoretical interest may be that the concept of perceived seriousness is not after all theoretically compelling. Measures of perceived seriousness have been used only as indicators of the concept of seriousness; they have not been utilized as indicators of more abstract concepts, such as those found in theoretical discourses. It may be beneficial to use alternative concepts that capture the essence of seriousness perceptions and are more theoretically attractive.

One direction to follow is to explore public control attitudes, that is, people’s approval or disapproval of formal or informal control of a behavior, Stylianou (2002). Instead of asking how serious an act is, researchers could ask for the participants’ opinion about controlling it. Control attitudes operationally reflect the degree of undesirability of a given behavior, just like the concept of perceived seriousness. An important advantage, however, is that control attitudes can better reflect the content of normative culture. Theoretical models of normative culture (e.g., collective consciousness and moral domination) can be tested using such attitudinal indicators. Such operationalization is based on the assumption that, to some extent, individuals reproduce normative culture in their own attitudes. The degree of internalization of these normative elements is a research question in its own merit. Additionally, the study of popular control attitudes can inform researchers pursuing research questions about the popularity of law and government responsiveness.

A second issue that deserves more attention is the connection to normative philosophy, that is, the philosophical foundations of normative culture. A central question in normative philosophy and law making is that of principles: based on what principles should society decide which behaviors it ought to control? At a basic level, there are three different answers to this question. First, the libertarian answer states that the freedom of the individual to pursue pleasure is an undeniable right, unless it conflicts with the well being of other citizens (Mill, 1859/ 1978). According to this view, the only legitimate operation of formal social control is the protection of other people. Second, the paternalistic answer states that the law, in addition to preventing harm to others, should protect individuals from harm resulting from their own actions. Third, the moralistic view, in addition to the above, supports that the law should be used to prevent behaviors that are morally wrong (even if victimless) in order to prevent moral decay. According to one version of moralism, society has the right and the need to preserve a common morality and to prevent behaviors that the great majority considers morally wrong (Devlin, 1965).

Beyond the philosophical debates regarding the correctness or legitimacy of using each of these principles in social control, empirical research can measure the popularity of these principles among citizens. These philosophical principles can be modeled and operationalized like other attitudinal concepts in the area of seriousness perceptions. Assuming that individuals are thinking agents (not simply passive carriers of established normative elements) and that they form their attitudes toward norms based on their own ‘‘personal’’ principles of judgment, research may investigate the extent to which philosophical principles are used by individuals in forming attitudes toward the control of behavior. Surveys and in-depth interviews can be used to measure to what extent individuals subscribe to philosophical principles and to what extent they favor the control of certain deviant behaviors. Warr’s (1989) work has been a good step in this direction. Perceived harmfulness and perceived wrongfulness, as conceptualized in Warr, are connected to the normative philosophical principles of libertarianism and moralism. These two dimensions can be studied further both conceptually and empirically. In addition, in the area of victimless crimes, paternalistic and moralistic principles can be modeled as independent variables affecting seriousness perceptions or control attitudes (see Stylianou, 2002).

Such research can be used to answer questions of both empirical and theoretical importance. First, the philosophical basis of informal normative culture can be studied based on indicators at the individual level.

Second, the philosophical basis of informal normative culture can be compared to the philosophical basis of formal normative culture, as the latter is reflected in legislation. Research questions about the popularity of law and government responsiveness can be answered in more elaborate ways if the logic of public attitudes is studied (beyond the study of prevalence of such attitudes, as suggested above). Third, this information may be used in presenting, clarifying, and understanding arguments for or against the criminalization or legalization of certain types of behavior such as sexual deviance and drug use.

A third possible direction of crime seriousness research is the calculation of weighted crime statistics. These statistics resemble those already used (prevalence, incidence, rates, etc.) and simultaneously provide seriousness information. In the introductory pages of the National Survey of Crime Severity, Wolfgang et al. (1985, p. ii) praised the usefulness of this project:

An accurate measure with which society views a broad range of criminal events would be helpful to lawmakers and policymakers. It could provide a measure of the appropriateness of sentencing practices and it could assist in the allocation of scarce justice resources. It could even indicate more accurately than at present whether crime is increasing or decreasing and by how much.

The calculation of alternative crime statistics began with Akman and Normandeau (1968) and Sellin and Wolfgang (1964). Sellin and Wolfgang attempted to define and apply formal measures of crime seriousness that would be used as weights attached to each offense.6 Later, Heller and McEwen

- (1973) attached seriousness weights to crime prevalence figures from the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department. They suggested that such alternative statistics could be used to facilitate police work (e.g., allocation of officers to duties). Hoffman and Hardyman (1986) suggested the use of seriousness surveys in providing feedback to criminal justice policy makers. They supported their proposition by showing that some behaviors are perceived as significantly less or more serious by the public (as compared to the formal standards). More recently, Kwan, Ip, and Kwan (2000) presented a weighted crime index, which they computed using seriousness perceptions and crime rates in Hong Kong. They showed that the index is valid and reliable and a better indicator of the intensity of crime.

The usefulness of this project, however, has been questioned. Based on a comparison of UCR national data for the period 1960–1972 to the Sellin and Wolfgang’s seriousness-weighted scale, Blumstein

- (1974) showed that, in assessing crime rate trends,


the two scales are ‘‘almost perfectly linearly correlated’’ (p. 864). Epperlein and Nienstedt (1989) confirmed this finding based on Arizona UCR’s from 1976 to 1982. In a more general sense, Manis (1974) asked for the use of scientific criteria over popular seriousness perceptions in identifying and assessing social problems. Additionally, Cohen (1988) proposed the use of the average monetary cost of an offense as a measure of seriousness. He showed that there is a remarkable similarity between perceived seriousness rankings reported in previous studies to rankings obtained by the calculation of monetary value for each type of offense. Rossi and Henry (1980) were also skeptical about the use of seriousness scores derived from public surveys for the specification of formal typologies and corresponding punishments. The importance of these criticisms is reflected in the fact that the calculation of seriousness-sensitive crime statistics has not gained academic or applied popularity.

The above criticisms, however, are predominantly directed against that use of weighted rates in assessing crime rate trends. The utility of using such statistics in assessing the seriousness of crime as a social problem and in the application of policies, at a given time, remains open to evaluation. For example, such alternative statistics can be used to specify the relative perceived impact of criminal acts by comparing the weighted rate (Perceived Seriousness Official Rate) of different acts in a given year.

In addition, alternative crime statistics can be a useful companion in some research agendas. For example, in the area of moral panics (Ben-Yehuda, 1990; Goode & Ben-Yehuda, 1994; Thompson, 1998), such statistics can be used for assessing the magnitude of a moral panic more precisely. The empirical relationship between key variables in the study of moral panics and social problems could also be better specified. For example, the relationship between public perceptions of crime as a social problem and media projections of crime is a central issue in the study of the social construction of crime. Conflict analysts accuse the media of disseminating irrational fear (e.g., Barak, 1995; Cohen, 1980; Potter & Kappeler, 1998; Zimmer & Morgan, 1997), while media agents typically understand their role as informing the public about existing dangers. The seriousness of these fears and dangers can be operationalized in the form of weighted rates and arguments on both sides can be tested.

Finally, crime seriousness research can be used in the debate over the control of victimless crimes. Here, the components of seriousness perceptions (such as perceptions of self-harm and perceptions of immor-

ality) are central. The control of drug use is a prime example. Communities have tried to control drug use based on various societal-need-based arguments: because drug users may be dangerous to other citizens, because they harm themselves, because they are not productive, etc. From a critical point of view, however, such control practices have been conceptualized as manifestations of traditional and religious moralities and/or as instruments of control used by the powerful segments of society against the powerless. Arguments of this type have been advanced in general theoretical forms (Quinney, 1970) and more specifically regarding the social history of certain substances, such as, alcohol (Gusfield, 1963), crack cocaine (Reinarman & Levine, 1995), and methamphetamines (Jenkins, 1994). So, is drug control a societal need or an instrument of domination? Understanding popular perceptions of drug use is essential in addressing this question. The basic components of these perceptions include the perceived seriousness, perceived harmfulness, and perceived wrongfulness of drug use, as well as the logic of justification of drug control in public opinion. The research on perceived seriousness can be further extended in the area of drug use (and victimless crime in general) to illuminate these issues. As suggested earlier, the measurement of the popularity of normative principles is a good starting point. Additional research issues include the process of formation of public opinion and the degree to which popular approval or disapproval of certain behaviors is reflected in legislation.

Conclusion

Crime is an undesirable aspect of social life. The nature and intensity of this undesirability is reflected in public perceptions of crime seriousness. These perceptions depend to some extent on the actual parameters of crime. At the same time, however, they are part of the social construction of contemporary reality and essential elements of normative culture. The study of these perceptions is an integral part of the study of social control. The present review attempted to summarize the accomplishments of this research and to highlight some of its problems and debates. It can be concluded from this review that the research on perceived crime seriousness has contributed significantly in understanding informal normative culture and social control. It can also be concluded that, based on these accomplishments, this body of scholarship can further expand in theoretical, empirical, and applied directions.

Acknowledgements

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Criminology, Toronto, Canada, November 1999. The author would like to express sincere appreciation to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on earlier drafts of this article.

Appendix A. Key features of empirical studies of perceived crime seriousness

Study (a) Country where the study was done

Sampled population

Sample size

Number of acts tested

Level of measurement (b)

Key findings (c)

575 141 Ordinal, ratio Weighted crime index construction. Perceived seriousness depends on perceived consequences. Relative consensus. Consistency of ordinal and ratio scales.

USA Students,

Sellin and Wolfgang

police, judges

(1964)

2,745 14 Ratio Weighted crime index construction. Findings of Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) confirmed. Rape rated more serious by women. Murder rated more serious by men.

Canada Students, judges, police, white-collar workers

Akman and Normandeau

(1968)

Sechrest (1969) USA Inmates, prison stuff

221 39 Ordinal Relative consensus between the two

samples. Hsu (1973) Taiwan Students,

547+(d) 14 Ratio Relative consensus between USA and Taiwan. Rape rated more serious than murder by Taiwanese females.

police, judges

Carss and Whitrod

Australia, Papua-New Guinnea

Students, military, police

653 63 Ordinal (e) Dissensus on some normative domains, consensus on others.

(1974)

Pease et al. (1974)

UK Students 147 8 Ratio Additivity assumption not supported.

Rossi et al. (1974)

USA General (f) 200 140 Ordinal Overall relative consensus among all demographic groups.

933 20 Ordinal, ratio Relative consensus among the three groups. Consistency of ordinal and ratio scales.

Figlio (1975) USA Students, inmates, detainees

Riedel (1975) USA Students 206 6 Ratio Descriptions of acts (offense

scenarios) did not affect ratings. Wellford and

USA Students 118 58 (g) Ratio Additivity assumption supported.

Wiatrowski

(1975)

USA Students 161 8 Ordinal (h) Religiosity and authoritarianism affected attitudes toward criminalization of victimless behaviors. Victimless behaviors not perceived as one category.

Abrams and Della-Fave

(1976)

Newman

USA, India, Indonesia, Iran, Italy, Yugoslavia

General (i) 2,360 9 Ordinal Perceived consequences and the moral aspect of an act affected perceived seriousness. Relative consensus cross-culturally. More consensus for the most serious offenses. Small effects of demographic correlates on seriousness perceptions.

(1976)

Hagan et al. (1977)

USA General (j) 1,504 2 Ordinal Consensus and conflict among

status groups. Roth (1978) USA Assistant

909 36 Ratio Relative consensus between prosecutors and samples of previous studies.

prosecutors

Wagner and Pease (1978)

UK Students 111 8 (k) Ratio Additivity assumption not supported.

Walker (1978) UK General, students

690 11 Ordinal, ratio, paired comparisons

Consistency of the three methods. Some sex and SES differences in ratings

Gottfredson et al. (1980)

- Study 1 USA Students 159 50 Ordinal Both studies: interaction effects detected between type of offense and monetary loss. Additivity assumption questioned
- Study 2 USA Students 158 70 Ordinal


Kvalseth (1980) Norway Students 25 14 Ratio Relative consensus in comparison to two previous studies in the USA and Canada.

USA General 200 140 Ordinal Organizational crimes and common crimes rated based on harm. Physical harm more serious than economic harm.

Schrager and Short (1980) [data from Rossi et al., 1974]

General 1,909 22 Ordinal (e) Overall relative consensus across countries; some exceptions (e.g., sexual offenses rated higher in Kuwait).

USA, UK, Kuwait, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Netherlands

Scott and Al-Thakeb

(1980)

Sheley (1980) USA Students 584 30 Ordinal Questionnaire form and item context did not influence the results.

(continued on next page)

Deschner et al. (1981)

- Study 1 USA Sheriff’s academy cadets, probation officers, general, church youth

98 55 Ordinal Relative consensus among groups

- Study 2 USA Probation officers

77 4 Ordinal Prior record of offender affects seriousness perceptions.

- Study 3 USA Students 117 42 Ratio Historical consensus on standard offenses. Significant change on marijuana ratings over time.
- Study 4 USA Students 518 69 Ratio Index construction.


Fleming

USA Students 171 6 Ratio Effects of gender and dogmatism on the perceived seriousness of some types of offenses.

(1981)

McCleary et al.

USA Criminal justice bureaucrats

154 140 Ordinal Relative consensus between this sample and general population samples in earlier studies. Criminal justice bureaucrats used more dimensions in their judgements. Victimless crimes rated less serious by criminal justice bureaucrats.

(1981)

Cullen et al. (1982)

USA General 105 140 Ordinal Perceived seriousness of white-collar crimes increased as compared to Rossi et al. (1974); it depends above all on perceived physical harm.

Evans and Scott (1982)

USA Students 784 37 Ordinal (e) Significant effects of item ordering on

perceived seriousness. Evans and

USA, Kuwait

Students 1,134 37 Ordinal (e), ratio (e)

Consistency of the two measurement methods. Relative consensus, except for morals offenses. Effects of religiosity.

Scott (1984)

Miethe (1984) [data from Rossi et al., 1974]

USA General 200 140 Ordinal Global relative consensus between Blacks and Whites. Local relative consensus for violent, white-collar and victimless crimes. Local absolute consensus for violent, white-collar, and public order offenses.

Blum-West

USA General 50 10 Ordinal, in-depth interviews

Imageries (stereotypes) affected seriousness perceptions.

(1985)

Cullen et al.

USA General 105 140 Ordinal Consensus findings of previous studies

(1985) [data from Cullen et al., 1982]

questioned. Distinction between absolute and relative consensus. Impact of demographic variables.

Levi and Jones (1985)

UK General, police

1,328 14 Ordinal Overall consensus between police and public; some disagreement (e.g., fraud, burglary, and victimless crime).

Pontell et al. (1985)

USA Police 105 60 Ordinal Relative consensus between police chiefs (this study) and the public (Rossi et al. 1974).

Wolfgang et al.

USA General (j) 60,000 204 Ratio Overall consensus. Seriousness perceptions depend on perceived consequences. Some dissensus: non-Whites lower than Whites, victims higher than non-victims, thefts of large amounts rated higher by older participants.

(1985)

Fishman et al.

Israel General 420 30 Ordinal (l) Criminal intent and degree of injury affected perceived seriousness.

(1986)

Hansel (1987) USA Students 79 9 In-depth interviews (m), ordinal (n)

Differences in crime stereotypes. Perceived seriousness and nine other dimensions measured.

Warr (1989) USA General 336 31 Ordinal Perceived seriousness depended on perceived harmfulness and perceived wrongfulness.

Corbett and Simon (1991)

UK General (o), police

194 26 Ordinal Overall relative consensus between public and police. Public rates minor offenses more serious.

Miethe (1991) USA Students 132 20 Ordinal, ratio Ordinal and ratio scales correlate very highly. Ordinal scaling slightly better in reliability and discriminatory power.

Parton et al. (1991)

USA Students 54 20 Ordinal (p) Various criticisms of Wolfgang et al.

(1985) by comparison to this study. The ratio scale must be used cautiously.

Rauma (1991) USA General 471 5 (q) Ordinal Seriousness perceptions structured around race, gender, political affiliation, education.

Carlson and Williams (1993)

USA General 31 48 Ordinal Application of the Q-methodology revealed four perspectives (personal viewpoints) underlying seriousness perceptions.

Lynch and Danner (1993)

USA Victims from a victimization survey

1,955 (r) Ordinal The results of this study and those of Wolfgang et al. (1985) did not correlate highly. Offense scenarios must include more dimensions of the offenses.

Feather (1996)

- Study 1 Australia General 220 3 Ordinal Right-wing authoritarianism affected seriousness perceptions in both studies.
- Study 2 Australia General 181 1 Ordinal


O’Connell and Whelan (1996)

Ireland General 623 10 Ordinal Badness and individual impact affect

seriousness perceptions. Historical consensus. Age, gender, education affect seriousness perceptions.

Douglas and Ogloff (1997)

Canada Students, general

155 15 Ordinal Violent offenses more serious than

property and white-collar offenses. Jacoby and

USA General (j) 1,920 24 (n) Ratio Relative (but not absolute) consensus in perceived seriousness and deserved prison sentence length.

Cullen (1998)

Mentor and Dorne (1998)

USA Students 157 50 Ordinal Right-wing authoritarianism affects

seriousness perceptions. Kwan et al. (2000)

Hong Kong

General 864 15 Paired comparison

Weighted crime index construction.

- (a) Only published empirical studies that specif-

ically focused on perceptions of seriousness are included.

- (b) Unless otherwise noted, all studies have used

survey questionnaires. This column reports the level of measurement of the scale used in the questionnaires.

- (c) This column refers to the key findings of each

study about seriousness perceptions. Other findings (e.g., about sentencing) have generally been omitted.

- (d) The number of judges is not reported.
- (e) Operationalized in the form of preferred pun-


ishments.

- (f) Unless otherwise noted, ‘‘general’’ refers to the

general population of a city.

- (g)Thirty-seven simple and twenty-one multiple

offenses.

- (h)Criminalization line (from agreement to dis-

agreement).

- (i) Both urban and rural samples.
- (j) National sample.
- (k)Four single-victim and four two-victim

offenses.

- (l) The participants were first asked to group the


offenses in categories and then to rank the categories.

- (m) Used for inductive survey questionnaire con-

struction.

- (n) In addition to an eleven-category ordinal scale,

Hansel asked respondents to draw a slash on a line from low to high. Technically, this may qualify for an interval scale. Eventually, the responses were coded categorically in forty-four ranks.

- (o) Driver’s license holders.
- (p) Unlike the typical eleven-point semantic dif-

ferential scales, these authors used a scale from 1 to 100 and specified that the minimum (1) is for ‘‘kicking over garbage cans’’ and the maximum (100) for ‘‘breaking into a house and stealing a TV’’. Although this resembles a ratio scale, it is ordinal. A ratio scale has a meaningful zero and equal distance intervals. Neither of the two conditions was established in the instruction to the respondents.

- (q) Multiple scenarios were composed based on a

factorial survey design.

- (r) Victimization incidents containing an unspe-


cified number of different offenses (mostly UCR index crimes) were used as stimuli.

Notes

- 1. It is customary to refer to this study as ‘‘pioneer-

ing,’’ a title that it definitely deserves. To be precise, Sellin and Wolfgang were not the first students of crime seriousness perceptions. In their study (1964), they reviewed a number of previous contributions.

- 2. In a few studies, researchers asked respondents to

assign punishments to the acts (Evans & Scott, 1982, 1984; Scott & Al-Thakeb, 1980). The punishments were ordered from the least to the most serious based on judgements of an independent sample. Based on the punishments ranking, the results of the main measurement were translated in ranks or magnitude scores. It must be noted that this method uses punishment as a proxy measure of seriousness. It should not be confused with the measurement of perceptions of deserved punishments, found in sentencing research.

- 3. According to Miethe (1982), this observed con-

sensus could be either a statistical artifact or a product of instructional bias. Consequently, the view that consensus in ratings among groups reflects an underlying normative structure is not warranted. See also Cullen et al. (1985).

- 4. The exceptions were Yugoslavia and Indonesia. In

Yugoslavia, religiosity was negatively sanctioned at that time and, according to Newman, religious people were probably more sensitive to the right to be different. In Indonesia, religion had positive (liberal) effects on homosexuality and abortion. Newman admits that this is hard to explain.

- 5. A widely used measure of authoritarianism is the

right wing authoritarianism (RWA) scale, developed by Altemeyer (1981).

- 6. As an illustration, assume that, in a hypothetical


community of 100,000 residents, there are ten murders and one hundred auto thefts in a given year. The rates for murder

and auto theft are ten and one hundred (per 100,000), respectively. For the seriousness of each individual act, assume that a random sample of citizens were asked to say how serious each act is on a scale from zero to infinity, given a reference rating (e.g., stealing a bicycle= 10). Assume that the results averaged to one hundred for murder and to twenty for auto theft. The weighted rates would be 10 100= 1000 for murder and 100 20= 2000 for auto theft.

References

Abrams, J. K., & Della-Fave, R. L. (1976). Authoritarianism, religiosity, and the legalization of victimless crimes. Sociology and Social Research, 61, 68–82.

Akman, D., & Normandeau, A. (1968). The measurement of crime and delinquency in Canada: A replication study. Acta Criminologica, 1, 135–260.

Altemeyer, B. (1981). Right wing authoritarianism. Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada: University of Manitoba Press.

Al-Thakeb, F., & Scott, J. E. (1981). The revitalization of Islamic Penal Law: An examination of its opponents. International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice, 5, 65–80.

Barak, G. (1995). Media, crime, and justice: A case for constitutive criminology. In J. Ferrell & C. R. Sanders (Eds.), Cultural criminology (pp. 142–166). Boston: Northeastern University Press.

Ben-Yehuda, N. (1990). The politics and morality of deviance: Moral panics, drug abuse, deviant science, and reversed stigmatization. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Bernard, T. J. (1983). The consensus-conflict debate: Form and content in social theories. New York: Columbia University Press.

Blumstein, A. (1974). Seriousness weights in an index of crime. American Sociological Review, 39, 854–864. Blum-West, S. R. (1985). The seriousness of crime: A study

of popular morality. Deviant Behavior, 6, 83–98.

Bridges, G. S., & Lisagor, N. S. (1975). Scaling seriousness: An evaluation of magnitude and category scaling techniques. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 66, 215–221.

Carlson, J. M., & Williams, T. (1993). Perspectives on the seriousness of crime. Social Science Research, 22, 190–207.

Carss, B. W., & Whitrod, R. M. (1974). A study of the relative seriousness of criminal offences as viewed by selected groups in Australia and Papua-New Guinea. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, 10, 96–100.

Cohen, M. A. (1988). Some new evidence on the seriousness of crime. Criminology, 26, 343–353. Cohen, S. (1980). Folk devils and moral panics: The creation of the mods and rockers. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Corbett, C., & Simon, F. (1991). Police and public perceptions of the seriousness of traffic offenses. British Journal of Criminology, 31, 153–164.

Cullen, F. T., Link, B. G., & Polanzi, C. W. (1982). The seriousness of crime revisited: Have attitudes toward white-collar crime changed? Criminology, 20, 83–102.

Cullen, F. T., Link, B. G., Travis, L. F., III, & Wozniak, J. F.

(1985). Consensus in crime seriousness: Empirical reality or methodological artifact? Criminology, 23, 79–118.

Curry, T. R. (1996). Conservative Protestantism and the perceived wrongfulness of crimes: A research note. Criminology, 34, 453–464.

Deschner, J. P., Plain, M. D., Terhune, G. K., & Williamson, C. (1981). Development of the DDI: A seriousness scale for delinquency. Evaluation Review, 5, 788–809.

Devlin, P. (1965). The enforcement of morals. London: Oxford University Press.

Douglas, K. S., & Ogloff, J. R. P. (1997). Public opinion of statutory maximum sentences in the Canadian criminal code: Comparison of offenses against property and offenses against people. Canadian Journal of Criminology, 39, 433–458.

Epperlein, T., & Nienstedt, B. C. (1989). Reexamining the use of seriousness weights in an index of crime. Journal of Criminal Justice, 17, 343–360.

Evans, S. S., & Scott, J. E. (1982). Effects of item order on the perceived seriousness of crime: A reexamination. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 21, 139–151.

Evans, S. S., & Scott, J. E. (1984). The seriousness of crime cross-culturally: The impact of religiosity. Criminology, 22, 39–59.

Feather, N. T. (1996). Reactions to penalties for an offense in relation to authoritarianism, values, perceived responsibility, perceived seriousness, and deservingness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 571–587.

Figlio, R. M. (1975). The seriousness of offenses: An evaluation by offenders and nonoffenders. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 66, 189–200.

Fishman, G., Kraus, V., & Cohen, B. (1986). A multidimensional approach to the problem of crime seriousness. International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice, 10, 177–189.

Fleming, S. (1981). The closed mind and the judgement of crime: A replication of the Sellin-Wolfgang index. International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice, 5, 51–64.

Goode, E., & Ben-Yehuda, N. (1994). Moral panics: The social construction of deviance. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.

Gottfredson, S. D., Young, K. L., & Laufer, W. S. (1980). Additivity and interactions in offense seriousness scales. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 17, 26–41.

Gusfield, J. (1963). Symbolic crusade: Status politics and the American temperament movement. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Hagan,J.(1994).Crimeanddisrepute. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.

Hagan, J., Silva, E., & Simpson, J. (1977). Conflict and consensus in the designation of deviance. Social Forces, 56, 320–340.

Hansel, M. (1987). Citizen crime stereotypes—Normative consensus revisited. Criminology, 25, 455–485.

Heller, N. B., & McEwen, J. T. (1973). Applications of crime seriousness information in police departments. Journal of Criminal Justice, 1, 241–253.

Hoffman, P. B., & Hardyman, P. L. (1986). Crime seriousness scales: public perception and feedback to criminal justice policy makers. Journal of Criminal Justice, 14, 413–431.

Hsu, M. (1973). Culture and sexual differences on the judgment of criminal offenses. Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science, 64, 348–353.

Jacoby, J. E., & Cullen, F. T. (1998). The structure of punishment norms: Applying the Rossi–Berk model. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 89, 245–312.

Jenkins, P. (1994). ‘The ice age’: The social construction of a drug panic. Justice Quarterly, 11, 7–31.

Kvalseth, T. O. (1980). Seriousness of offenses: An experimental study based on a psychophysical scaling technique. Criminology, 18, 237–244.

Kwan, Y. K., Ip, W. C., & Kwan, P. (2000). A crime index with Thurstone’s scaling of crime severity. Journal of Criminal Justice, 28, 237–244.

Levi, M., & Jones, S. (1985). Public and police perceptions of crime seriousness in England and Wales. British Journal of Criminology, 25, 234–250.

Lynch, J. P., & Danner, M. J. E. (1993). Offense seriousness scaling: An alternative to scenario methods. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 9, 309–322.

Manis, J. G. (1974). Assessing the seriousness of social problems. Social Problems, 22, 1–15.

McCleary, R., O’Neil, M. J., Epperlein, T., Jones, C., & Gray, R. H. (1981). Effects of legal education and work experience on perceptions of crime seriousness. Social Problems, 28, 276–289.

Mentor, K. W., & Dorne, C. K. (1998). The association between right-wing authoritarianism and perceived seriousness of deviant acts: A research note. Deviant Behavior, 19, 73–87.

Miethe, T. D. (1982). Public consensus on crime seriousness: Normative structure or methodological artifact? Criminology, 20, 515–526.

Miethe, T. D. (1984). Types of consensus in public evaluations of crime: An illustration of strategies for measuring consensus. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 75, 459–473.

Miethe, T. D. (1991). Social psychophysical measurement: A comparison of the measurement properties of magnitude and categorical scaling of social perceptions. Social Science Quarterly, 67, 195–204.

Mill, J. S. (1859/1978). In E. Rapaport (Ed.), On liberty. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing. Newman, G. R. (1976). Comparative deviance: Perception and law in six cultures. New York: Elsevier.

O’Connell, M., & Whelan, A. (1996). Taking wrongs seriously: Public perceptions of crime seriousness. British Journal of Criminology, 36, 299–318.

Parton, D. A., Hansel, M., & Stratton, J. R. (1991). Measuring crime seriousness: Lessons from the National Survey of Crime Severity. British Journal of Criminology, 31, 72–85.

Pease, K., Ireson, J., & Thorpe, J. (1974). Additivity assumptions in the measurements of delinquency. British Journal of Criminology, 14, 256–263.

Pontell, H. N., Granite, D., Keenan, C., & Geis, G. (1985). Seriousness of crimes: A survey of the nation’s chiefs of police. Journal of Criminal Justice, 13, 1–13.

Potter, G. W., & Kappeler, V. E. (1998). Introduction. In G. W. Potter & V. E. Kappeler (Eds.), Constructing crime: Perspectives on making news and social problems (pp. 1–24). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland.

Quinney, R. (1970). The social reality of crime. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.

Rauma, D. (1991). The context of normative consensus: An expansion of the Rossi/Berk consensus model with an application to crime seriousness. Social Science Research, 20, 1–28.

Reinarman, C., & Levine, H. G. (1995). The crack attack: America’s latest drug scare, 1986–1992. In J. Best (Ed), Images of issues: Typifying contemporary social problems ( pp. 147– 186). Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.

Riedel, M. (1975). Perceived circumstances, inferences of intent, and judgments of offense seriousness. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 66, 201–208.

Rokeach, M. (1960). The open and closed mind. New York: Basic Books.

Rossi, P. H., & Berk, R. E. (1985). Varieties of normative consensus. American Sociological Review, 50, 333– 347.

Rossi, P. H., & Henry, J. P. (1980). Seriousness: A measure for all purposes? In M. W. Klein & K. S. Teilmann (Eds.), Handbook of criminal justice evaluation (pp. 489–505). Newbury Park: Sage.

Rossi, P. H. & Nock, S. L. (Eds.). (1982). Measuring social judgments: The factorial survey approach. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Rossi, P. H., Simpson, J. E., & Miller, J. L. (1985). Beyond crime seriousness: Fitting the punishment to the crime. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 1, 59–90.

Rossi, P. H., Waite, E., Bose, C. E., & Berk, R. E. (1974). The seriousness of crime: Normative structure and individual differences. American Sociological Review, 39, 224–237.

Roth, J. (1978). Prosecutor perceptions of crime seriousness. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 69, 232–242.

Schrager, L. S., & Short, J. F., Jr. (1980). How serious a crime? Perceptions of organizational and common crimes. In G. Stotland & E. Stotland (Eds.), White-collar crime (pp. 14–31). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Scott, J. E., & Al-Thakeb, F. (1980). Perceptions of deviance cross-culturally. In G. Newman (Ed.), Deviance: A

comparative perspective (pp. 42–67). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Sebba, L. (1984). Crime seriousness and criminal intent. Crime and Delinquency, 30, 227–244.

Sechrest, D. K. (1969). Comparisons of inmates’ and staff’s judgments of the severity of offenses. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 6, 41–55.

Sellin, T., & Wolfgang, M. (1964). The measurement of delinquency. Montclair: Patterson Smith (Reprinted, 1978, with an introduction by S. Turner).

Sheley, J. F. (1980). Crime seriousness ratings: The impact of survey questionnaire form and item context. British Journal of Criminology, 20, 123–135.

Stevens, S. S. (1975). Psychophysics: Introduction to its perceptual, neural, and social prospects. New York: Wiley.

Stylianou, S. (2002). Control attitudes toward drug use as a function of paternalistic and moralistic principles. Journal of Drug Issues, 32, 119–152.

Thompson, K. (1998). Moral panics. London: Routledge. Thurstone, L. L., & Chave, E. J. (1929). Measurement of

attitudes. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Vogel, B. (1998). Perceptions of crime seriousness in the African American community: Exploring the presence of consensus. Journal of Criminal Justice, 26, 227–236.

Wagner, H., & Pease, K. (1978). On adding up scores of offense seriousness. British Journal of Criminology, 18, 175–178.

Walker, M. A. (1978). Measuring the seriousness of crimes. British Journal of Criminology, 18, 348–364. Warr, M. (1989). What is the perceived seriousness of crimes. Criminology, 27, 795–814.

Wellford, C. F., & Wiatrowski, M. (1975). On the measurement of delinquency. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 66, 175–188.

Wolfgang, M. E., Figlio, R. M., Tracy, P. E., & Singer, S. I.

(1985). The national survey of crime severity. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Yu, X. Q. O. (1993). Comparing perceptions and cultural orientations of students in China and America: A crosscultural study of college students’ judgement of crime seriousness. Doctoral dissertation, State University of New York, Buffalo.

Zimmer, L., & Morgan, J. P. (1997). Marijuana myths marijuana facts: A review of the scientific evidence. New York: Lindesmith Center.

