doi:10.1093/bjc/azr019 BRIT. J. CRIMINOL. (2011) 51, 739–772 Advance Access publication 1 April 2011

# POVERTY MATTERS

# A Reassessment of the Inequality–Homicide Relationship in Cross-National Studies

William Alex Pridemore*

Dozens of cross-national studies of homicide have been published. Virtually all have reported an association between inequality and homicide, leading scholars to draw strong conclusions about this relationship. Unfortunately, each of these studies failed to control for poverty, even though poverty is the most consistent predictor of area homicide rates in the US empirical literature and a main confounder of the inequality–homicide association. The cross-national ﬁndings are also incongruent with US studies, which have yielded inconsistent results for the inequality–homicide association. In the present study, I replicated two prior studies in which a signiﬁcant inequality–homicide association was found. After the original results were replicated, models that included a measure of poverty were estimated to see whether its inclusion had an impact on the inequality–homicide association. When effects for poverty and inequality were estimated in the same model, there was a positive and signiﬁcant poverty–homicide association, while the inequality–homicide association disappeared in two of three models. These ﬁndings were consistent across different samples, data years, measures of inequality, dependent variables (overall and sex-speciﬁc homicide rates) and estimation procedures. The new results are congruent with what we know about poverty, inequality and homicide from the US empirical literature and suggest that the strong conclusions drawn about the inequality–homicide association may need to be reassessed, as the association may be a spurious result of model misspeciﬁcation.

Keywords: homicide, poverty, inequality, cross-national studies

Introduction

The theoretical literature addressing the association between social structure and violence has a long history in Europe and the United States. The tradition of empirically testing these ideas employing cities, states and nations as units of analysis began in earnest in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Since that time, the association between social structure and homicide has been the focus of several dozen published cross-national studies (for reviews, see LaFree 1999; Pridemore and Trent 2010), with a far greater number of studies examining this association using sub-national units within the United States (for reviews, see Messner and Rosenfeld 1999; Pratt and Cullen 2005).

Economic conditions have received signiﬁcant attention in both US and cross-national studies of social structure and homicide. These two literatures, however, have come to very different conclusions about the impact of poverty and inequality on homicide rates. Until recently, this disagreement has not been scrutinized in the literature

* PhD, Indiana University, Department of Criminal Justice, Sycamore Hall 302, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA; wpridemo@indiana. edu.

739

The Author 2011. Published by OxfordUniversity Press on behalf of theCentrefor Crime andJustice Studies (ISTD). All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

PRIDEMORE

(Pridemore 2008). In brief, US studies have consistently found poverty to be associated with homicide rates, while the results of tests for an association between inequality and homicide have been inconsistent. In the cross-national literature, on the otherhand, the association between inequality and homicide has been so consistent that very strong conclusions have been made about this relationship.

In addition to the differing conclusions drawn from these two literatures, another key feature is that only a single cross-national study explicitly included a control for poverty. This raises the possibility that the inequality–homicide association so often found in the cross-national literature is a spurious result of model misspeciﬁcation. Another hint that the strong conclusions drawn about the inequality–homicide association at the crossnational level may have been premature comes from the one cross-national study that included a control for poverty. In it, Pridemore (2008) found that when poverty and inequality were included in the same model, the poverty–homicide association was signiﬁcant and the inequality–homicide association was not.

In this paper, I examine these issues by ﬁrst reviewing the main conclusions drawn from the cross-national and US literatures on social structure and homicide and pointing out the inconsistencies between the two. To address the empirical question of the possibility of model misspeciﬁcation in prior cross-national analyses, I then revisit brieﬂy the Pridemore (2008) study and replicate two recent important, careful and thorough studies that found an inequality–homicide association. Once the latter two studies have been replicated, I add to their models a proxy for poverty to determine whether (1) there is a poverty–homicide association at the cross-national level and (2) the inequality– homicide association remains after controlling for poverty.

The contributions of the present study go well beyond Pridemore (2008). First, a single study (especially in the social sciences and macro criminology) does not provide a deﬁnitive answer to any question. Second, the Pridemore (2008) ﬁndings are already generating further research on this topic (Messner et al. 2010; Pare´ and Felson 2010) and the present study addresses a crucial question—what happens to the conclusions drawn from the existing empirical literature when we include a key control missing from their models?—that is not covered by these other studies. Third, the Pridemore (2008) study, while using similar approaches to prior analyses, collected new data and possessed its own idiosyncrasies. An easy critique is that these idiosyncrasies are the source of his different ﬁndings. By replicating and extending prior published studies (using their own data and methods) that are already part of the existing cross-national literature, new evidence is presented independently of Pridemore (2008). Fourth, the ﬁndings from the present study will be important to the literature on social structure and violence, no matter what the results. If the inequality–homicide association remains when poverty is included, then we have shown the relationship holds when controlling for a key confounder. On the other hand, if the association disappears when poverty is included in the model, then it is likely that prior ﬁndings were at least partially the result of model misspeciﬁcation and we may need to re-evaluate the very strong conclusions drawn thus far about the inequality–homicide association at the cross-national level. Fifth, in carrying out this exercise, I learned of another important and unaddressed limitation to the scientiﬁc record on social structure and homicide at the national level. This limitation concerns issues of data sharing for the purposes of replication, which is a fundamental element of the accumulation of knowledge, and I report on this here.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

POVERTY MATTERS

Literature Review The cross-national literature

What follows is not meant to be an exhaustive review of the cross-national and US literatures on social structure and homicide. Instead, it focuses on the conclusions drawn from these two literatures as they relate to the effects of inequality and poverty on homicide rates. Table 1 contains information on nearly four dozen cross-national studies of social structure and homicide published since 1965. The table shows the authors of the study, the data years used, the number of nations included in the analysis, the measure of inequality employed, the measure of poverty, any other economic measures included in the analysis and a list of control variables. While this list is not exhaustive, it contains all studies included in LaFree’s (1999) thorough review of cross-national homicide studies, a few recent studies published after LaFree’s review and summarizes the typical crossnational study one ﬁnds in the literature.

Table 9.1 in LaFree’s review shows that with one exception (Messner 1982), in all studies showing a signiﬁcant inequality–homicide association the relationship is in the positive direction. In recent years, the inequality–homicide association in these cross-national studies has been found with such consistency that scholars have drawn very strong conclusions about its existence. Messner and Rosenfeld (1997), for example, stated that a ‘ﬁnding that has emerged with remarkable consistency is that high rates of homicide tend to accompany high levels of inequality’ (Messner and Rosenfeld 1997: 1394). Similarly, inhisreview ofthe cross-national homicide literature, LaFree (1999) concluded that a ‘positive association between economic inequality and homicide rates is among the most consistent ﬁndings in the cross-national literature’ (LaFree 1999: 141).

Over time, this consistency continued and the acceptance of the association solidiﬁed. For example, many scholars now take the existence of the inequality–homicide association as a point of departure when testing theories in which certain national features are suspected of moderating inequality’s effect on homicide rates, such as tests of institutional anomie theory (Messner and Rosenfeld 1997; Savolainen 2000) and social support theory (Pratt and Godsey 2003). For some, the discussion began to move beyond correlation to causation. For example, Fajnzylber, Lederman and Loayza (2002) stated that violent crime ‘and inequality are positively correlated within countries and, particularly, between countries, and this correlation reﬂects causation from inequality to’ rates of violence (Fajnzylber et al. 2002: 1). In recent years, the presence of the association has become so accepted as to be assumed. Wilkinson (2004), for example, entitled his article ‘Why Is Violence More Common where Inequality Is Greater?’ and the ﬁrst sentence of the abstract of that paper states deﬁnitively that ‘[t]he most well-established environmental determinant of levels of violence is the scale of income differences between rich and poor’ (Wilkinson 2004: 1).

Lest this discussion be viewed as a critique of these prior studies or scholars, it should be stated that the summaries, conclusions and assumptions mentioned to this point were on target. Many of these scholars were simply summarizing the results of prior studies and were correct in their conclusions about the consistency of the inequality– homicide association. The current article is not a critique of the earlier studies or of those who have summarized their ﬁndings. What is necessary, however, is to point out a vital omission in the prior cross-national studies as it relates to the US literature on social structure and homicide, and then attempt to correct for it.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

TABLE 1 Summary of cross-national studies of social structure and homicide

- 742


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 1 Avison and Loring

(1986)

1967–71 (homicide) 1964–72 (income) 1965 (ethnic hetero)

32 Gini coefﬁcient – Level of economic production (energy consumption per capita)

Ethnic heterogeneity Population density Labour force participation Proportion of youth

- 2 Bennet (1991a) 1960–84 52 (in sample) 47 (in analysis)

Ray and Singer’s index of concentration

– Level of development (GDP per capita) Rate of economic growth

Form of development Urbanization Proportion of juveniles

- 3 Bennet (1991b) 1960–84 52 (in sample) 43 (in analysis)

Ray and Singer’s index of concentration

– Attractive targets (GDP per capita)

Accessibility of goods Size of (juvenile) pool Urbanization Female labour force partic.

- 4 Bennet and Lynch

(1990)

1960–72 (1st analysis) 1975–80 (2nd analysis)

25 (1st analysis) 31 (2nd analysis)

– – Economic development (GDP per capita)

Type of dataset Labour force participation

- 5 Braithwaite (1979) (Note: data summarized here are from portion of book devoted to international comparisons only, pp. 203–8, 228)

1955–64 (dates vary for each country and variable)

20 (1st analysis) 29 (2nd analysis)

Lydall’s ordinal scaling on earnings inequality

– Social security expenditures (as percentage of GNP) GNP level (high or low)

–

- 6 Braithwaite and Braithwaite (1980)

1955–74 31 (19 and 20 in later analyses)

Gini coefﬁcient (though a number of others tested)

– Protein grams per capita (1st analysis) GDP per capita (2nd analysis)

Political freedom Ethnic fractionalization Strength of socialist parties

- 7 Conklin and Simpson (1985)


1967–70 52 Infant mortality rate (as indicator ofsocial inequality)

– – Percentage of males 15–29 Persons per square mile Population size Percentage urban Energy cons. per capita School enrolment ratio Life expectancy Sex ratio Telephones per 100 inhab.

TABLE 1 Continued

- 743


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 8 Fajnzylber, Lederman and Loayza (2002)

1965–94 20 Gini coefﬁcient (and ratio poorest to richest income quintile shares)

– GNP per capita (in logs) GDP growth rate

Geographic location Cultural heritage Average years of education Urbanization

- 9 Fiala and LaFree

(1988)

Various dates from 1960 to 1977 (different data years for almost every variable)

40 (but varies for each regression from 16 to 40)

Percentage income going to poorest 20% families Ratio of top 20% to bottom 40% income

– Unemployment rate Level of development (per capita GNP and log per capita GNP) Societal attempts to limit economic deprivation

Status of females in society Female labour force partic. Speed of social change Degree to which violence is culturally accepted Surveillance at gov’t level Community surveillance Surveillance by family and friends

- 10 Gartner (1991) 1965–80 17 at multiple time points

– – Social security expenditures as percentage of GDP

Illegitimate birth rate Teen mother birth rate Child ( Crude divorce rate Female labour force partic. Loss of life in 20th c. wars

- 11 Gartner, Baker and Pampel (1990)

1950–80 18 at multiple time points

– – – Female share in uni. enroll. Female share in labour force Female share unmarried Female share of population Illegitimacy rate Divorce rate Occupational desegregation

- 12 Groves, McCleary and Newman (1985)


1970–75 50 Gini coefﬁcient (with sign reversed to measure equality)

– GDP per capita Religious ecology Judge to CJ personnel ratio Inf. mortality (measure of quality of healthcare) Percentage labour force in agriculture School enrolment ratio

TABLE 1 Continued

- 744


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 13 Hansmann and Quigley (1982)

– 58 (in sample) 40 (in inequality tests)

Gini coefﬁcient – GNP per capita Heterogeneity of language Heterogeneity of ethnicity Heterogeneity of religion Population density Urbanization Percentage aged 15–25 in population

- 14 Hartnagel (1982) 1971 40 – – Economic index GNP per capita

Education index Female labour force partic. Fertility Illiteracy Marriage rates Occupational stratiﬁcation Urbanism

- 15 Huang (1995) 1975–80 29 Ray and Singer’s index of concentration

– GDP per capita Level of individualism Level of communitarianism Urbanization Population density (log) Population growth Female labour force partic. Educational enrolment

- 16 Huang (2001) 1975–80 24–62 (varies by year and data source)

– – GDP per capita Unemployment rate

Percentage enrolled in college Population density Population growth Population size Urbanization Female labour force partic.

- 17 Jacobs and Richardson (2008)

1975–95 14 at multiple time points

Gini coefﬁcient – Unemployment rate GDP per capita

Percentage minorities Percentage urban Percentage males 15–29 Inf. mort. (measure of social disorg.)

- 18 Kick and LaFree


1968–73 40 Gini coefﬁcient – GNP per capita Avg. persons per household Percentage labour force non-agri. Educational enrolment Telephones per 100 Urbanization

(1985)

TABLE 1 Continued

- 745


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 19 Krahn, Hartnagel and Gartrell (1986)

1960, 1965, 1971, 1975 (homicide rates) 1967–79 (other variables)

65 (homicide) 32–72 (other variables for speciﬁc years)

Gini coefﬁcient – GDP per capita (log) GDP growth rate Development of capitalist relations of production (capital formation as percentage of GDP)

Female labour force in agr. Female labour force in mining and manufacture Adult literacy rate Urbanization Divorce rate Population growth Age distribution Population density Educational enrolment Avg. number of riots in 5 years Avg. number of public protests Percentage defence expenditures Size of internal sec. force Political democracy index Ethnic and linguistic fractionalization

- 20 Krohn (1976) 1959–66 (crime) 1972 (inequality) 1967 (unemployment)

38 (unemployment) 27 (inequality) 24 (both)

Gini coefﬁcient – GNP per capita Unemployment rate

Level of energy consumption per capita

- 21 Krohn (1978) 1965 (with some independent variables taken from 1972 World Handbook)

33 Gibbs and Martin’s measure of the division of labour

– GNP per capita (as part of Feieraband measure of systemic frustration, see right)

Total population Urbanization (‘urbanity’) Level of energy consumption per capita Feierabend measure of systemic frustration: literacy rates minus radios, telephones and newspapers per capita and GNP per capita)

- 22 Krohn and Wellford


(1977)

59 — — GNP per capita Political orientation Population size

TABLE 1 Continued

- 746


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 23 LaFree and Kick

(1986)

1968–73 47 Gini coefﬁcient – Developmental index (measured by GNP per capita, telephones/radios per capita, energy cons. per capita, percentage labour force nonagricultural, literacy rate and educ. enrolment)

Total population Population growth Urbanization

- 24 Landau (1984) 1965–80 14 – – Inﬂation Births to unmarried mothers Marriage/divorce ratio Mental health contacts
- 25 Lee (2001) 1987–93 (homicide) 1985–90 (pop. growth) 1993 (inequality)


50 Percentage of nation’s wealth held by richest 20%

– GDP per capita Population growth Political rights index Civil liberties index Population density Infant mortality rate (as measure of social inequality; not tested individually but included as part of a development index) Population size Population age 15–19 Urbanization

TABLE 1 Continued

- 747


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 26 McDonald (1976) (Note: book also includes a chapter on ‘England and Wales as a Test Case’ in which author performs a time series analysis; that information is not summarized here, as it was not a crossnational study)

1961–66 (INTERPOL) 1946–56 (UN)

40 (INTERPOL) 31 (UN)

Lorenz coeff. Gini coefﬁcient

GNP per capita

Unemployment rate Social security expe ditures School expenditures

Literacy rate Educational enrolment Child-to-woman ratio Urbanization Newspaper circulation Radios per capita Existence of an efﬁcient, universal bureaucracy Police force size Index of data collection comprehensiveness Linguistic heterogeneity Racial heterogeneity Religious heterogeneity Constitutional status Proportion voting Political representation Government stability Executive stability Population increase

- 27 Messner (1989) 1976–82 (homicide) 1983 (econ. discrim.) Late 1960s–early 1970s (income inequality) Approx. 1980 (other variables)

52 (in sample) 32 (in analysis)

Gini coefﬁcient – (GNP, life expect. and infant mortality meant to measure poverty, but not included in models individually)

Economic discrimination (scope and intensity, ‘weighted’) GNP per capita Development index

Life expectancy Infant mortality rate Percentage population Urbanization Ethnolinguistic hetero. Total population Population density Political democracy index Percentage males age 15–19

- 28 Messner (1980) 1952–70 (homicide) Early 1960s (inequality)


39 Gini coefﬁcient – GDP per capita Population size Population density Urbanization

TABLE 1 Continued

- 748


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 29 Messner (1985) 1970–74 (homicide) Early 1960s (inequality) 1976 (demographics) 1972 (GDP)

29 Gini coefﬁcient – GDP per capita Percentage males 45–49 never married Percentage females 45–49 never married Total population Gender

- 30 Messner (1982) ‘The 1960s (exact years vary depending on data)’

50 Gini coefﬁcient subtracted from 1 (social equality)

– GDP per capita Percentage of population Protestant Educational enrolment Population size Population density Urbanization Population growth

- 31 Messner et al. (2002) 1975–94 67 (in sample) 27–65 (in individual analyses)

Gini coefﬁcient – GDP per capita Annual GDP growth rate Decommodiﬁcation of labour (measured by welfare exp. as percentage of GDP, welfare exp. per capita, percentage distribution of beneﬁt exp. across program type)

Energy consumption per capita Total population Urbanization Population density Population growth Percentage population Males per 100 females

- 32 Messner and Rosenfeld (1997)


1980–90 45 (in sample) 39–45 (in analyses)

Gini coefﬁcient Economic discrimination index (using Gurr’s data)

– Decommodiﬁcation of labour (measured by welfare exp. as percentage of GDP, welfare exp. per capita, percentage of total beneﬁt exp. allocated to employment injuries) GNP per capita

Inf. mort. rate (as part of development index) Life expectancy Percentage population Population growth Urbanization Males per 100 females

TABLE 1 Continued

- 749


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

- 33 Neapolitan (1998) 1988–94 (though income inequality data may be from late 1960s)

118 (in sample) 78 (in inequality analyses)

Ratio of percentage income of top 10% to bottom 20%

– GNP per capita Development level Urbanization Racial classiﬁcation Percentage of population age 15–29 Average household size Ethnic heterogeneity

- 34 Neapolitan (1994) 1978–80, 1986–90 67 (WHO/UN) 106 (INTERPOL)

Percentage income of richest 10% minus percentage income of poorest 20%

– Economic discrimination index (see Messner and Rosenﬂeld) GDP per capita

Political rights index Ethnic heterogeneity Urbanization Percentage population Population size Population density

- 35 Neapolitan (1996) 1986–90 (homicide) 1985 (inequality)

63 (UN) 69 (WHO) 105 INTERPOL

Ratio: percentage income of richest 10% to poorest 20%

GDP per capita Population size Population density

- 36 Ortega et al. (1992) 1969–82 (varies by data availability)

51 – – GNP per capita Age structure/distribution Urbanization Total population

- 37 Pratt and Godsey


1989–95 46 Ratio of richest to poorest 20%

(2002)

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

– Human development index (as measured by life expectancy, adult literacy rates, educational enrolment, GDP per capita and age composition)

Percentage GDP spent healthcare Percentage GDP spent public educ. Males per 100 females Urbanization Percentage 1-yr-olds immunized for measles Western nation or not

TABLE 1 Continued

- 750


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 38 Pratt and Godsey

(2003)

1989–95 46 Ratio of richest to poorest 20%

– Human development index

Percentage GDP on health care Males per 100 females Urbanization Age structure/distribution Disorg. index (as measured by age structure, sex ratio, inf. mort., percentage pop. age 15–19 never married, pop. growth) Incarceration rate Percentage of 1-yr-olds immunized for measles

- 39 Pridemore (2008) 2000 46 Gini coefﬁcient Ratio of richest to poorest 20%

Infant mortality

GDP per capita Urbanization Education Percentage young males

- 40 Quinney (1965) 1953–60 48 – – – Industrialization Urbanization
- 41 Rosenfeld and Messner (1991)


Multiple 32 Caste strat. Class strat. Relative dep. measured as composite of diff. between culturally prescribed and actually achieved wealth, power and status

– – Drunken brawling Military authority Political authority Political oppression Population size Typical settlement size Wife beating Change in moral codes Change in trad. authority Change in subsist. occup. Divorce Population density Judicial authority Organizational complexity Largest settlement size Technological complexity

TABLE 1 Continued

- 751


Author (date) Data year(s) Number of countries Measure of inequality

Measure of poverty

Other economic measures

Controls

- 42 Savolainen (2000) (Note: there are two analyses in this article. The ﬁrst uses Messner and Rosenfeld’s data/ variables, the second is supplementary sample; info on each is separated by a space in the following columns)

1980–90 (1st analysis) 1990 (2nd analysis)

45 (1st analysis) 32 (2nd analysis)

Gini coefﬁcient d Economic discrimination index Gini coefﬁcient

– –

Decommodiﬁcation of labour Development index (measured by GHP per capita, life exp., inf. mort., elderly pop., pop. growth, urban develop.) GDP per capita

Males per 100 females Gender of victims Percentage of public expenditures on social security and other welfare programs Age structure Males per 100 females

- 43 Shichor (1990) 1967–68 1972–73 1976–78

44 – – GDP per capita Population size Population growth Infant mortality rate Ratio of pop. to hosp. beds Ratio of pop. to physicians Newspapers per 1,000 pop. Percentage GNP spent on education

- 44 Steffensmeier et al.

(1989)

1970–76 69 – – Occupational segregation

Energy per capita Percentage female uni. students Radios per capita

- 45 Unnithan and Whitt

(1992)

1950–70 31 Kuznets index – (justiﬁes not using measure of poverty in note 1)

GNP per capita Suicide rate

- 46 Wellford (1974) 75 – – GNP per capita Political orientation Population size
- 47 Wolf (1971) 17 – – GNP per capita Percentage labour force in agriculture Infant mortality rate Adult literacy rate Newspapers per capita Telephones per capita Urbanization Non-Western nations


Examining the ‘Measure of poverty’ column in Table 1, we see that for nearly every study, the column is blank. In one instance, GNP per capita was employed as a measure of poverty, but, as I discuss below, this is an invalid indicator of absolute deprivation. In one other study (Messner 1989), the author discussed poverty and initially included reasonable proxies (e.g. infant mortality and life expectancy).1 When estimating models, however, these proxies were included together with other measures in an index meant to represent development and thus their individual effects on homicide could not be discerned. The general point to be made here is that in the dozens of studies that have resulted in the strong conclusions about the inequality–homicide association, not a single one included a control for poverty. Thereasonwhythisissoimportantismadeclear whensummarizingtheempiricalliterature on social structure and homicide in the United States.

The US literature

Relative to cross-national studies, there have been considerably more studies of social structure and homicide within the United States and the latter are usually more sophisticated than the former. The greater sophistication is due mainly to (1) more and better data sources for both the independent and dependent variables, (2) a more thorough understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of these data collection instruments relative to knowledge about international sources, and (3) the greater theoretical and methodological care that results from being subjected to more rigorous peer review of studies over time.

Throughout the 1970s, several US studies found a consistent association between poverty and homicide at both the state and city levels. The Blau and Blau (1982) and Messner (1982) studies published in 1982, however, shifted the focus away from poverty and towards inequality, and a meta-analysis by Hsiegh and Pugh (1993) a decade later suggested essentially equal footing for poverty and inequality in their associations with homicide rates. Since then, however, poverty has been the more consistent predictor of area homicide rates, while the ﬁndings for inequality have been mixed.

In their extensive review of the literature for the National Research Council, Sampson and Lauritsen (1994) found that ‘[a]lmost without exception, studies of violence ﬁnd a positive and usually large correlation between some measure of area poverty and violence – especially homicide’ (Sampson and Lauritsen 1994: 63). Similarly, in their thorough review for a comprehensive sourcebook on homicide research, Messner and Rosenfeld (1999) stated that ‘poverty appears to be an important component of the correlated causes that consistently accompany high aggregate levels of homicide’ (Messner and Rosenfeld 1999: 28). Further, Pratt and Cullen (2005) undertook a meta-analysis of empirical studies of social structure and homicide, ﬁnding that ‘the effect of poverty was one of the ﬁve macro-level predictors to receive scores of high for both strength and stability of effects’ (Pratt and Cullen 2005: 412).2 Finally, in another review of the literature,

- 1Messner (1989) appears to be the only one to address the theoretical and methodological aspects of the debate over absolute versus relative deprivation in the cross-national literature. He also recognized the limitations of GNP as an indicator of poverty and included better proxies for poverty (i.e. infant mortality and life expectancy). These proxies were not tested individually, however, but instead included together with other measures in an index of societal development.
- 2Only two of the remaining four variables found to be high on both strength and stability of effects directly represent a theoretical concept. These two are family disruption and incarceration. The remaining two are per cent non-white and per cent black. The effects of inequality were found to be ‘moderate’ in both strength and stability.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Pridemore (2002) concluded that ‘the positive relationship between poverty and homicide is the most consistent ﬁnding in the literature’ (Pridemore 2002: 144).

On the other hand, the results for the inequality–homicide association in the US literature are mixed. Several studies showed a positive and signiﬁcant association, though many others, including one by Messner (1982) that was vital to stimulating interest in this area, revealed no association. In their review of the US literature, Messner and Rosenfeld (1999) concluded that ‘the evidence is once again mixed, and it is difﬁcult to reach unambiguous conclusions about the effects of inequality on homicide rates’ (Messner and Rosenfeld 1999: 30). On the same topic, Pridemore (2002) concluded that the ‘empirical evidence for positive effects of inequality on homicide rates have been neither as strong nor as consistent as those for poverty ... [and] the reasons cited for this inconsistency are the same ones through which the poverty ﬁndings hold up: disparate samples, differing operationalizations, varying levels of analysis, and multicollinearity’ (Pridemore 2002: 144).

In sum, the conclusions drawn from the US empirical literature on social structure and homicide are different from those drawn from the cross-national literature. First, in the United States, poverty is consistently associated with area homicide rates, while, in the cross-national literature, poverty has not even been tested. Second, in the crossnational studies, the inequality–homicide association is so consistent that scholars have drawn strong conclusions about the relationship and most take it for granted. In the US literature, on the other hand, the ﬁndings for the inequality–homicide association are mixed: sometimes positive and signiﬁcant, sometimes null. The most important aspect of this incongruence is that the inequality–homicide association in the US literature is most erratic when poverty is included in the same model, while in the cross-national literature poverty is never included. This leads to the question of what happens to the inequality–homicide association in cross-national studies when we control for poverty.

The lacuna

The incongruence in the conclusions drawn from the cross-national and US empirical literatures is accompanied by a gap in the former: the failure to test the poverty–homicide association or to even control for poverty when testing other hypotheses. This lacuna is important both theoretically and methodologically.

The failure to control for poverty is questionable theoretically, as there are reasons to believe that poverty is associated with area homicide rates. Although the exact causal mechanisms are debated, several theoretical traditions—including conﬂict, opportunity, social disorganization, strain and sub-cultural theories—posit a link between absolute deprivation and violence. As shown above, the empirical literature provides considerable support for this hypothesis. With such a sizeable empirical literature on social structure and homicide at the cross-national level, the observer is left to wonder why the poverty–homicide thesis has not been a central component of cross-national studies, let alone why it has not been tested at all.

Several cross-national studies do include a measure of per capita GDP or GNP. While most authors do not claim GDP/GNP is a measure of poverty, many treat it as such in their discussions. While GDP/GNP may be considered a measure of development or

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

average well-being in a nation, it cannot be considered a measure of poverty, as it does not represent the bottom end of the income or wealth distribution, which is the concern of poverty theorists. Two nations with the same per capita GDP/GNP can easily vary substantially in the proportion of their populations living in poverty. In the end, absolute deprivationis theoretically distinct from general well-being and including a measure of the latter is not assurance that one has controlled for the former.

The failure to control for poverty in cross-national studies of homicide is also questionable methodologically. First, it means we are not controlling for the most consistent predictor of homicide rates. Just as importantly, it means that we are not controlling for the main confounder of the inequality–homicide association. In other words, while inequality almost always exhibits a strong bivariate correlation with homicide rates in the United States, it is when poverty is included in the same model with inequality that the results for the latter (but not usually the former) often become inconsistent. These related points suggest that prior cross-national studies suffer from model misspeciﬁcation.

The aforementioned inclusion of a measure of per capita GDP/GNP in several studies also has methodological ramiﬁcations. Since GDP/GNP is not a measure of poverty, it cannot be expected to capture and control for the latter’s effect on homicide. Until now, we may have been accidently lulled into thinking of the inequality–homicide association as robust because if we allow ourselves to consider GDP/GNP a measure of poverty, then we think the inequality–homicide association is strong and consistent, since it remains when ‘poverty’ is controlled.

What we should expect The main question that arises from all this is the following: are the prior inequality–homicide ﬁndings the result of misspeciﬁed models and, if so, does this call into question the strong conclusions about the cross-national research outlined above? The ﬁrst part of this question can be answered simply by including

- a control for poverty in models assessing the association between inequality and homicide at the cross-national level. There are two competing expectations when this is done.


The ﬁrst expectation is that the inequality–homicide association will remain. This would be an important ﬁnding, for multiple reasons. It would mean that, despite prior model misspeciﬁcation, inequality theory is still supported even when the main confounder is included in the model. Substantively, this would also suggest that the association between inequality and homicide victimization at the national level is different from the association at the sub-national level (at least based on US studies). Yet, if the inequality–homicide association at the cross-national level remains after correcting for the main methodological ﬂaw in prior studies, this provides a compelling reason to examine the relationship more closely and attempt to understand why the strength of the association varies by unit of analysis.

The competing expectation is that the inequality–homicide association will disappear. This ﬁnding would also be important. It would be inconsistent with what we think we know from prior studies and it would call into question the strong conclusions drawn from the existing cross-national empirical literature. On the other hand, this ﬁnding would reconcile the differences between the US and cross-national literatures because it would mean the inequality–homicide association would be null or inconsistent in both. Bringing congruence to these literatures would represent a substantial innovation to research on social structure and violence.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Hypotheses

Given the review of the US and cross-national theoretical and empirical literatures on social structure and homicide, my hypotheses are as follows:

- (1) Inequality and homicide will be associated in models that include neither GDP nor poverty.
- (2) The inequality–homicide association will remain when GDP is included in the models.
- (3) There will be a signiﬁcant association between poverty and homicide when inequality is not included in the models.
- (4) When inequality and poverty are included in the same models, the inequality– homicide association will disappear or be inconsistent, while the poverty–homicide association will remain.


Data, Method and Results

To test these hypotheses, I ﬁrst revisit the ﬁndings from Pridemore (2008) then carry out two additional and independent analyses. The ﬁrst additional analysis replicated a study by Fajnzylber et al. (2002). The second additional analysis replicated a study by Savolainen (2000). The nations, years and control variables employed by these three studies were quite different and, thus, any consistent ﬁndings across the three studies should be considered meaningful and not simply repeating the same ﬁndings with similar data.

The same systematic approach was employed in all three cases. For the additional analyses, the ﬁrst step was to replicate the ﬁndings of the prior studies from the data provided to me by the authors. In all three studies, the next step was to estimate a general model that included inequality and the typical controls, but not GDP (or GNP, depending upon the measure used in the original studies). The next step was to include a model with both inequality and GDP/GNP to see whether the latter’s inclusion inﬂuenced the inequality–homicide association. The next step was to replace inequality with a measure of poverty to see whether a poverty–homicide association exists with the data from each study. The ﬁnal step was to include inequality and poverty in the same model to assess the effects of each on homicide controlling for the other.

The Pridemore study

The Pridemore study appeared in Criminology in 2008. The reader is encouraged to consult the original article for details concerning measurement and method. The study employed data on 46 countries from 2000. The nations employed for this analysis are listed in Appendix A. The author measured inequality in two different ways. The ﬁrst was the standard Gini coefﬁcient. The second measure, employed to make sure that any results were not sensitive to the use of the Gini coefﬁcient as a measure of inequality (Messner et al. 2002), was the ratio of the income or consumption share of the top 20 per cent of the population relative to the bottom 20 per cent of the population.

One potential reason why inequality–homicide studies do not include a control for poverty might be because there is not a common single measure of this concept available for most nations. Deﬁning and measuring poverty is difﬁcult, especially for nations at

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

different levels of development. While the United Nations provides a Human Poverty Index (HPI), for example, there are actually two different indices, one for developing nations (HPI-1) and one for the countries of the OECD, Central and Eastern Europe, and the CIS (HPI-2). Similarly, the population below the income poverty line is computed differently for these two sets of nations. Although a direct measure of poverty is unavailablefor allnations, infant mortality iscommonly used asa proxy, and thiswas the indicator (deﬁned as the number of infant deaths per 1,000 live births) employed by Pridemore.

The results of the author’s analysis appear in Table 2 on p. 142 of the original article and can be summarized as follows.3 First, there was a positive and signiﬁcant inequality– homicide association when poverty was not included (b = 0.37, p = 0.042). Second, this association remained when GDP was included. Third, there was a positive and signiﬁcant poverty–homicide association when inequality was not included in the model (b = 0.55, p = 0.028). Finally, when both poverty and inequality were included in the same model, poverty retained its association with homicide (b = 0.52, p = 0.030) but the inequality– homicide association disappeared (b = 0.19, p = 0.203).

Replication and re-estimation of Fajnzylber et al.

The Fajnzylber et al. (2002) study appeared in the Journal of Law and Economics. The reader should consult the original article for details concerning measurement and method. The study employed data on 39 countries from 1965 to 1994, undertaking three different analyses to examine the inequality–homicide relationship: pooled levels, pooled ﬁrst differences and country averages. Only the ‘country average’ approach is replicated and reanalysed here, since it most closely resembles the typical cross-national homicide study. There were six observations for each country in the study, one for each ﬁve-year period between 1965 and 1994. While most nations had some missing data, available data for each variable were ﬁrst averaged over each ﬁve-year time frame. In the ‘country average’ analysis, the authors averaged these averages to get a single score for each nation on each of the variables over the entire period. See Appendix B, Table B1, in Fajnzylber et al. (2002) for a list of the nations and the number of observations (i.e. ﬁve-year averages) for each nation. I provide a list of nations employed by these authors in Appendix A.

The authors used the Gini coefﬁcient to measure inequality, which was correlated with the averaged homicide rate at 0.58 (see Table 1, p. 10, in the original study). The results of their three analyses appear in Table 3 on p. 13 of the original article. Based upon the data provided to me by the second author of their study, I was able to replicate the ‘country averages’ analysis, which is Model 3 in Table 3 in their article and Model 1 in Table 2 in the present paper. Their ﬁndings show the expected positive and signiﬁcant association between inequality and homicide (b = 0.56, p = 0.006).4 The authors drew the same inferences with two alternative measures of inequality: the 20–20 ratio described in the Pridemore study above and income polarization.

After replicating their initial ﬁndings, I made two small changes before estimating new modelstotestmyhypotheses.First,Chinawasdroppedfromtheanalysisbecauseitreported an unrealistically low homicide rate of 0.18 per 100,000. Second, Hong Kong was excluded

3See Pridemore (2008) for a discussion of model sensitivity and the robust ﬁndings. 4In their paper, Fajnzylber et al. report only the unstandardized coefﬁcient and t-statistic. The standardized coefﬁcient and p-value

reported in my text here are taken from my replication.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

from the re-estimated models containing poverty because data were not available on this variable. Model 2 in Table 2 provides the results of the basic model. As expected, inequality is positively and signiﬁcantly associated with homicide (b = 0.51, p = 0.006). Model 3 shows the results when the natural logarithm of GNP is included in the model. This is essentially the same as Model 1 without the inclusion of China in the sample, and it shows that (1) my small change to the data did not have an impact on the main issues at hand (i.e. compare these results to the authors’ original results as reported here in Model 1) and (2) when GNP is included, the inequality–homicide association isstillsigniﬁcant(b =0.43,p =0.012),again conﬁrming my hypothesis.

- Model 4 replaces inequality with a measure of poverty. The infant mortality rate was

used as a proxy for poverty. I collected data on infant mortality for each of the ﬁve-year periods used for each nation, averaging this measure in the same manner as the original authors averaged theirs. The skew statistic for this measure was more than twice its standard error and, thus, the natural logarithm of these values was used when estimating models. As with the Pridemore (2008) study outlined above, the measure of GNP was dropped from this and the ﬁnal model because of high levels of multicollinearity, but also, as before, the same inferences for inequality and poverty were obtained whether GNP was included or excluded. The results in Model 4 show a positive and signiﬁcant association between poverty and homicide. An informal comparison reveals a higher standardized coefﬁcient for poverty than for inequality in the earlier models. Finally,

- Model 5 shows the results when both are included in the model (the bivariate correlation between inequality and poverty here is 0.63). The ﬁndings reveal that when poverty is included in the same model as inequality, poverty retains its signiﬁcant association with homicide rates (b = 0.90, p < 0.001) and the inequality–homicide association disappears (b = 0.07, p = 0.363).


Replication and re-estimation of Savolainen

The Savolainen article appeared in Criminology in 2000. The reader should consult the original study for details about measurement and method. The ﬁrst part of Savolainen’s article obtained data from, replicated and extended an earlier analysis by Messner and Rosenfeld (1997), the results of which appear in Table 1 in Savolainen’s article. In the present analysis, I focus on the results presented by the author in Table 2 in his article, for which he collected new data to further test his theory. Unlike Fajnzylber et al. (2002), this was a cross-sectional analysis (of 32 nations) with observations taken at generally the same time (i.e. 1990). My Appendix A shows the nations included in his sample. Savolainen did not carry out his analysis on the overall homicide rate, but instead disaggregated it into male and female homicide victimization rates.

Savolainen used the Gini coefﬁcient as his measure of inequality, which had bivariate correlations of 0.70 and 0.35 with male and female homicide rates, respectively (see Appendix B, Table 3, in his article). His results from the multivariate analyses appear in Table 2 on p. 1034 of his article. In my reanalysis, I focused only on Models 1 and 3 in that table (i.e. the models for men and women, respectively, that did not include his interaction term testing institutional anomie theory). Based on the data provided to me by the author, I was able to replicate exactly the results of these two models. These two replications are shown here as Model 1 in Tables 3 (males) and 4 (females). The

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

ﬁndings show the expected positive and signiﬁcant association between inequality and homicide (b = 0.57, p = 0.001 for males, b = 0.34, p = 0.077 for females).5

After replicating these original ﬁndings, I made a few small changes before estimating new models to test my hypotheses. First, in Savolainen’s analyses, the absolute value of the proportion of the population aged 15–24 was used. I employed the natural logarithm of these values because the skew statistic for this variable was more than twice its standard error. Second, in Savolainen’s original model, the values for inequality and welfare spending were centred because they were included as an interaction term in subsequent models. I used the original values for these variables. Further, since the skew statistic for the Gini coefﬁcient was nearly twice its standard error, I used the natural logarithm of these values.6 Model 2 in Tables 3 and 4 provide results for the basic inequality model. As expected, they reveal a positive and signiﬁcant association between inequality and homicide rates (b = 0.71, p < 0.001 for males, b = 0.52, p = 0.028 for females). Model 3 in each of these tables shows the ﬁndings when GNP per capita was included. The results again conﬁrm my hypothesis that the inclusion of this measure does not have a major inﬂuence on the inequality–homicide association, which is still positive and signiﬁcant in both models.

Model 4 in Tables 3 and 4 replaces inequality with poverty. The infant mortality rate (in this case, for the year 1990) was the proxy for poverty and the natural logarithm of these values was used, since the skew statistic for the distribution was greater than twice its standard error. As with the two prior analyses discussed above, high levels of multicollinearity led me to drop the GNP measure from Models 4 and 5. Nevertheless, also as with the results reported for the prior two analyses, the inferences drawn for the poverty and inequality variables were the same whether or not GNP was included. The results in Model 4 in both tables show a positive and signiﬁcant association between poverty and homicide rates (b = 0.85, p < 0.001 for males, b = 0.76, p = 0.004 for females) and, again, informal comparisons with results from Model 2 show the standardized coefﬁcients for poverty to be considerably larger than those for inequality. Finally, Model 5 shows the results when poverty and inequality were included in the same model (note that the bivariate correlation between inequality and poverty here was 0.73 and the more general issue of multicollinearity in studies such as these is addressed in the ‘Limitations’section below). The ﬁnding for males was the one case in the four examples provided in this article in which the inequality–homicide association remained signiﬁcant (b = 0.38, p = 0.037) when poverty was included in the model, though the size of the standardized coefﬁcient shrank considerably compared to earlier models. The results for males also show a positive, signiﬁcant and substantially stronger association (relative to inequality) between poverty and homicide (b = 0.60, p = 0.007). The results for female homicide victimization in Table 4 are consistent with the prior two analyses reported above. In other words, the ﬁndings reveal a positive and signiﬁcant association between poverty and homicide (b = 0.65 p = 0.031), while the inequality–homicide association disappears (b = 0.17, p = 0.293).

5Given the small sample size (i.e. n = 32), the more liberal interpretation by Savolainen of this p-value is reasonable. 6Technically, logging the values of these two variables changes the functional form of the model. While appropriate given the distribution of the variables, this changes slightly my replication of the original study. Therefore, I re-estimated all eight models (four each for men and women) of the Savolainen replication using the original unlogged values. In all models, there were no differences to the inferences or to the original conclusions drawn about inequality, poverty and homicide. These results are available from the author upon request.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

TABLE 2 Results of Fajnzylber et al. replication and re-estimationa

- 759


Independent variables

Model 1: Fajnzylber modeld

Model 2: Basic inequality model

Model 3: Inequality with GNP

Model 4: Poverty replaces inequalitye

Model 5: Inequality and poverty

b t-statistic b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (

Intercept 1.17 0.58 0.01 0.498 3.05 0.051 –4.40 0.007 –4.47 0.007 GDP growth –12.03 –1.67 –2.97 (–0.06) 0.354 1.98 (0.04) 0.398 15.38 (0.28) 0.028 14.27 (0.26) 0.051 LnGNP per capita –0.35 –1.39 –0.55 (–0.55) 0.010 Urban 0.00 0.25 –0.02 (–0.30) 0.028 0.00 (0.00) 0.493 –0.00 (–0.07) 0.303 –0.01 (–0.08) 0.282 Education 0.04 0.36 –0.00 (–0.01) 0.488 0.09 (0.19) 0.188 0.18 (0.37) 0.040 0.19 (0.39) 0.039 Inequalityb 0.07 2.92 0.06 (0.51) 0.006 0.05 (0.43) 0.012 0.01 (0.07) 0.363 Povertyc 1.32 (0.95) <0.001 1.25 (0.90) Adj. R2 0.34 0.36 0.44 0.55 0.54

aTwo changes were made after the original Fajnzylber et al. model was replicated. First, China was dropped from the sample due to an unrealistically low homicide rate. Second, Hong Kong was not included in the models estimating the effects of poverty because data for this measure were unavailable.

- b Measure of inequality here is the Gini coefﬁcient. Fajnzylber et al. replicated their pattern of ﬁndings with two alternative measures of inequality: the 20–20 ratio (see text) and income polarization (see Models 1 and 2 in Table 5 on p. 20 of Fajnzylber et al., 2002).
- c The proxy for poverty used here is the natural logarithm of the infant mortality rate.
- d These are the original results as shown in Model 3 (‘Country Averages’) of Table 3 on p. 13 of Fajnzylber et al. (2002). I was able to replicate these results based upon the data provided to me by Daniel Lederman, the second author on that article.
- e LnGNP per capita not included in Models 4 and 5 because of high levels of multicollinearity (e.g. VIFs in Model 4 were 5.1 and 5.8 for poverty and Ln GNP per capita, respectively, and even higher in Model 5). Nevertheless, the inferences drawn for poverty and inequality in these two models when Ln GNP per ca included were the same as shown here. Results available from author.


TABLE 3 Results of Savolainen replication and re-estimation for males (n = 32)

- 760


Independent variables

Model 1: Savolainen modeld

Model 2: Basic inequality model

Model 3: Inequality with GNP

Model 4: Poverty replaces inequalitye

Model 5: Inequality and poverty

b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (

Intercept 17.21 0.001 4.55 0.285 5.83 0.236 1.88 0.400 3.56 0.308 GNP per capita –0.02

0.180 –0.03 (–0.24) 0.151 Percentage 15–24a –0.00

(–0.14)

0.284 –0.29 (–0.10) 0.252 –0.24 (–0.08) 0.288 0.00 (0.00) 0.498 –0.06 (–0.02) 0.435 Sex ratio –15.48

(–0.06)

0.004 –12.66 (–0.25) 0.088 –12.16 (–0.24) 0.095 –4.46 (–0.09) 0.280 –10.99 (–0.22) 0.090 Welfare spendingb –0.05

(–0.41)

0.008 –0.04 (–0.36) 0.024 –0.03 (–0.24) 0.124 –0.00 (–0.03) 0.437 –0.01 (–0.06) 0.369 Inequalityb 0.06

(–0.44)

0.001 3.20 (0.71) <0.001 2.67 (0.59) 0.006 1.73 (0.38) 0.037

(0.57)

Povertyc 1.59 (0.85) <0.001 1.12 (0.60) 0.007 Adj. R2 0.69 0.64 0.66 0.63 0.67

- a In Savolainen’s original model, the absolute value of the proportion of the population aged 15–24 was employed. I employed the natural logarithm of th when estimating Models 2–5 because the skew statistic for this variable was more than twice its standard error.
- b In Savolainen’s original model, the values for welfare spending and inequality (measured by Gini coefﬁcient) were centred. In Models 2–5 here, I use t uncentred values. Further, I employed the natural logarithm of the values for the Gini coefﬁcient because the skew statistic for this variable was nea standard error. cThe proxy for poverty used here is the natural logarithm of the infant mortality rate.


- d These are the original results as shown in Model 1 in Table 2 on p. 1034 of Savolainen (2000). I was able to replicate these results exactly based upon the d provided to me by Savolainen.
- e GNP per capita not included in Models 4 and 5 because of high levels of multicollinearity (e.g. VIFs in Model 4 were 5.1 and 4.7 for poverty and GNP per capi respectively, and even higher in Model 5). Nevertheless, the inferences drawn for poverty and inequality in these two models when GNP per capita was in the same as shown here. Results available from author.


TABLE 4 Results of Savolainen replication and re-estimation for females (n = 32)

- 761


Independent variables

Model 1: Savolainen modeld

Model 2: Basic inequality model

Model 3: Inequality with GNP

Model 4: Poverty replaces inequalitye

Model 5: Inequality and poverty

b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (b) p-value b (

Intercept 15.09 0.002 8.28 0.116 8.87 0.107 7.18 0.128 7.62 0.121 GNP per capita –0.01 (–0.10) 0.323 –0.02 (–0.18) 0.292 Percentage 15–24a –0.00 (–0.06) 0.348 –0.14 (–0.08) 0.352 –0.12 (–0.06) 0.377 0.028 (0.02) 0.468 0.01 (0.01) 0.488 Sex ratio –14.82 (–0.61) 0.003 –12.33 (–0.40) 0.061 –12.09 (–0.39) 0.068 –9.48 (–0.31) 0.076 –11.22 (–0.36) 0.067 Welfare spendingb –0.03 (–0.47) 0.030 –0.02 (–0.33) 0.093 –0.02 (–0.24) 0.210 0.00 (0.01) 0.485 –0.00 (–0.00) 0.495 Inequalityb 0.02 (0.34) 0.077 1.44 (0.52) 0.028 1.20 (0.43) 0.085 0.46 (0.17) 0.293 Povertyc 0.87 (0.76) 0.004 0.75 (0.65) 0.031 Adj. R2 0.38 0.19 0.16 0.31 0.28

aIn Savolainen’s original model, the absolute value of the proportion of the population aged 15–24 was employed. I employed the natural logarithm of th when estimating Models 2–5 because the skew statistic for this variable was more than twice its standard error. bIn Savolainen’s original model, the values for welfare spending and inequality (measured as the Gini coefﬁcient) were centred. In Models 2–5 here, I u uncentred values. Further, I employed the natural logarithm of the values for the Gini coefﬁcient because the skew statistic for this variable was nea standard error. cThe proxy for poverty used here is the natural logarithm of the infant mortality rate. dThese are the original results as shown in Model 3 in Table 2 on p. 1034 of Savolainen (2000). I was able to replicate these results exactly based upon the d provided to me by Savolainen. eGNP per capita not included in Models 4 and 5 because of high levels of multicollinearity (e.g. VIFs in Model 4 were 5.1 and 4.7 for poverty and GNP per capi respectively, and even higher in Model 5). Nevertheless, the inferences drawn for poverty and inequality in these two models when GNP per capita was in the same as shown here. Results available from author.

Discussion

In light of the obvious inconsistencies associated with poverty, inequality and homicide between the cross-national and US literatures, three main questions arise: Why has this situation not been addressed more carefully in the literature? Is poverty associated with homicide rates at the national level? Are the strong conclusions drawn thus far about the inequality–homicide association a spurious result of misspeciﬁed models? The ﬁrst question is beyond the scope of this article. The second question was answered in Pridemore (2008), with further evidence provided here. To address the third question, four hypotheses were tested in a way that corrected for the important omission in prior cross-national studies of social structure and homicide—that is, failing to control for a known major confounder—and that addressed the incongruence in the ﬁndings from the cross-national and US empirical literatures.

The ﬁrst hypothesis was that the inequality–homicide association would exist in models that included neither GDP/GNP nor poverty. This hypothesis was supported in all instances. The second was that the inequality–homicide association would remain when controlling for GDP. This hypothesis was supported in all cases. The third hypothesis was that the introduction of a measure of poverty to the typical cross-national models would reveal a consistent positive and signiﬁcant poverty–homicide association. The results provide support for this expectation in all instances. The ﬁnal hypothesis was that when inequality and poverty were included together in the same model, the inequality– homicide association would disappear or be inconsistent, while the poverty–homicide association would remain. The ﬁndings provide support for this dual hypothesis. There was a positive and signiﬁcant poverty–homicide association in all models after controlling for inequality.7 The inequality–homicide association, on the other hand, disappeared in three of the four models.8

The ﬁndings presented here are consistent with recent research on poverty, inequality and homicide.9 Based on his initial work on this topic using a larger sample and more recent data than prior studies, Pridemore (2008) came to the same conclusions as those drawn here. In addition, a careful study by Pare´ (2006), again using independently collected data and carrying out his own unique analyses, reached essentially the same conclusion. In short, employing proxies for poverty (infant mortality and the Human Poverty Index mentioned above) similar to that used in my study, Pare´ found no inequality–homicide association in his sample of 63 nations, but did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant poverty– homicide association. Finally, though slightly different in nature and intent, Neumayer’s (2003) cross-national homicide study is also relevant. Pooling data from about 120 countries over time and employing a greater number of institutional correlates, he found no effect of inequality on national homicide rates.

- 7It is worth noting, as well, that infant mortality has been included as an individual variable in at least two prior analyses. Conklin and Simpson (1985) employed it as an indicator of social inequality, and Jacobs and Richardson (2008) as a measure of social disorganization. Both studies found infant mortality to be positively and signiﬁcantly associated with homicide rates.
- 8Between Pridemore’s (2008) results and those presented here, ﬁndings are consistent across three distinct studies with data collected and analysed by different authors and those differed on nations in the sample, years in which observations were taken, measures of inequality, type of homicide rate (i.e. overall and sex-speciﬁc rates) and estimation procedures (OLS and WLS).
- 9Nevertheless, these new ﬁndings do not invalidate the Savolainen (2000) and Fajnzylber et al. (2002) studies employed as examples. Although the inequality–homicide ﬁnding was important in the former, for example, it was not the focus of the study. Instead, Savolainen was testing hypotheses from institutional anomie theory (Messner and Rosenfeld 2006) and was concerned with how the strength of non-economic social institutions may moderate the effects of inequality on violence.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

The strength and meaning of the support for each of these hypotheses have implications for theory and method. Although poverty and inequality are often highly correlated empirically, and while there are reasons to expect them to be related conceptually, the theoretical literature on why we should expect each to be associated with homicide rates is very different. While several theories ‘claim’ poverty, most of their explanations for its association with homicide rates are at the macro level. Conversely, though often discussed and tested at the macro level, inequality normally is tied theoretically to violence via individual-level explanations (Chamlin and Cochran 2005), usually as an outcome of frustration resulting from the unfair distribution of resources (Blau and Blau 1982). There is nothing wrong with this reductionist approach, as long

- as we recognize that, following this logic, the impact of inequality on homicide represents a compositional effect. If there is a structural level effect of inequality on homicide rates, a clearer theoretical explanation is required, since inequalities in homicide rates do not necessarily mean that inequality causes higher homicide rates. Similar issues have received considerable attention, as they relate to other forms of morbidity and mortality (Goldman 2001; Marmot et al. 1995) and to neighbourhood and structural effects on health (Kawachi and Berkman 2003).


The current ﬁndings could actually represent a chance for integrating macro-level aspects of poverty and inequality as they relate to area violence rates. There is no doubt, for example, that cultural, social, political and economic systems act unequally to stratify groups and areas with regard to access to and possession of a range of resources, but this inequity does not provide a macro explanation in itself for an outcome like variation in homicide rates. It could be, however, that once the groups are stratiﬁed, the more proximate conditions concomitant with the concentration of poverty lead to negative outcomes like higher rates of homicide.

The ﬁndings presented here should not be viewed as a deﬁnitive statement that the inequality–homicide association does not exist at the cross-national level, or that the poverty–homicide association should now be assumed. Instead, this article should be viewed as an addition to the literature that (1) explicitly addresses the incongruence between the cross-national and US literatures, (2) reveals what happens when we correct for an important omission in the prior cross-national research, and (3) provides a cautionary note that suggests that the strong conclusions drawn thus far about the inequality–homicide association from the cross-national literature may have been premature. The latter point is in line with earlier work by Rosenfeld and Messner (1991). In that study, the authors found no association between inequality and homicide in a sample of small nonindustrial societies, and concluded that ‘some of the most important ﬁndings of cross-national research in sociology are not readily generalizable across different types of societies’ (Rosenfeld and Messner 1991: 51).

On the other hand, the inequality–homicide association has retained its strength in the face of important confounders in other studies. Although average economic wellbeing and poverty are theoretically distinct in their expected associations with homicide rates, empirically, they are often highly correlated (as measured, say, by per capita GDP and infant mortality, respectively). Infant mortality has also been shown to be highly correlated with measures of social development or even included in indices designed to gauge this concept. That inequality retains its association with homicide rates in some of these instances in which these two controls are present suggests there is further research to be done before the issue is resolved.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Another important implication of the results presented here is that we should expand the theoretical and methodological discourse as it relates to the social production of homicide rates cross-nationally. For example, given the prior ﬁndings, there is a growing discursive literature on the inequality–homicide association’s meaning and interpretation. This is reasonable, but, by focusing so heavily on inequality in recent years, and being so assured of its association with homicide, we have likely discouraged thinking about other important possibilities, thus hindering innovation in theory, method, measurement and policy development. While economics is important, scholars would do well to introduce variables that test other theories, reduce signiﬁcantly the prediction errors and control for potentially important confounders. These might include incarceration rates, types and levels of policing and government characteristics like levels of corruption or strength of democratic institutions.

Finally, a logical next step is to test the moderating effects of social support, welfare spending, the strength of non-economic institutions and decommodiﬁcation on the strength of the association between crime and other negative social and economic conditions like poverty (Pare´ 2006) and social change (Kim and Pridemore 2005). Nations that score highly on decommodiﬁcation are better at providing support for citizens in the lowest economic strata, thereby reducing poverty (and, as a by-product, inequality). Thus, researchthat ﬁnds anassociation between decommodiﬁcation andhomicide rates, orthat the effects of inequality on homicide are buffered in nations with higher levels of decommodiﬁcation (Messner and Rosenfeld 1997; Savolainen 2000), is suggesting that poverty is what matters. These policies are not meant to reduce relative deprivation, but, instead, to reduce absolute deprivation by attempting to provide the resources necessary for healthy daily living. In fact, Pare´’s (2006) work ‘suggests that the negative relationship between social welfare and the homicide rate observed in previous studies is attributable to poverty reduction, not income inequality reduction’ (Pare´ 2006: iii).

Limitations

We must consider a few limitations when interpreting the results of the analyses presented here. First, only two prior studies were replicated and re-evaluated. It would be ideal, and it was my original intention, to replicate as many prior cross-national studies as possible. However, when we corresponded with the authors of about half the studies listed in Table 1, the outcome was disheartening. Only Dr Lederman and Dr Savolainen agreed to provide their data to us,10 with most authors stating they were no longer in possession of the data used to carry out the analyses. Many of these studies were published long ago and those authors can be forgiven for not possessing the original punch cards or magnetic tapes on which their data were stored. Many other studies, however, were published (some in prominent journals) much more recently and these data should be readily available and provided to others who wish to replicate the work for scientiﬁc purposes. Unfortunately, this experience speaks poorly to the state of this area of the discipline and it must be rectiﬁed. Under normal circumstances, the failure to provide data in this situation would at best generate considerable scepticism about the ﬁndings from such studies. Many medical and public health journals require a signed

10Dr Savolainen’s analyses were based on data collected by Dr Steve Messner for an earlier study and the latter also kindly agreed to provide me with these data.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

agreement that stipulates authors must retain their data and provide them to scholars that request the data for replication purposes. A statement about data sharing for replication purposes is included in the Certiﬁcation of Compliance with APA Ethical Principles that must be signed by all authors publishing in any APA journal and a similar statement about data sharing is included in the American Sociological Association’s Code of Ethics.11 Replication is a fundamental element of science and perhaps it is time for criminology and other social science journals to take this more seriously.

A second limitation is that deﬁning and measuring poverty are difﬁcult for nations

- at different levels of development, so there exists no single direct measure of poverty at the national level. Infant mortality, however, is commonly employed as a proxy for poverty due to its many advantages as an indicator of deprivation. First, empirical support for a correlation between poverty and infant mortality at the national level is so consistent that it is now assumed (Antonovsky and Bernstein 1977; Burnside and Dollar 1998; Firebaugh and Beck 1994; Frey and Field 2000; Ross 2006). Sub-national studies in the United States (Strait 2006) and elsewhere also commonly ﬁnd a strong association between the two. A second advantage is that infant mortality is not dependent on arbitrary deﬁnitions of income poverty. Measures like household income do not capture social beneﬁts, for example, which vary substantially by nation. A third advantage is that infant mortality is a more accurate measure of human poverty than income-based indicators. Conceptually, traditional measures of poverty based on income are narrowly deﬁned (United Nations Development Programme 2006), whereas the UNDP’s indices of human poverty, for example, are constructed from indicators that are closely associated with infant mortality. Methodologically, while Reddy and Pogge (2005) have highlighted the errors in the World Bank’s estimates of income poverty, infant mortality rates are based on data from vital statistics registration systems that are more complete in their coverage than surveys of household income. Even where vital statistics registration systems lack complete coverage, this is negatively correlated with level of development, meaning that the statistical effect on tests like those performed here is to bias estimates in a conservative direction. Finally, although using infant mortality as a proxy for poverty is more common in other disciplines than in criminology, it has been used as an indicator of or an instrumental variable for poverty in research on social structure and homicide (Loftin and Parker 1985; McDowall 1986; Messner 1989).


A ﬁnal limitation, while methodological in nature, plays an important role for the substantive interpretation of these results and their theoretical implications. Measures of absolute deprivation and inequality are often highly collinear. A similar problem is collinearity between indicators of poverty, such as infant mortality, and indicators of development and average well-being, such as GDP or the development index used by many scholars (see Table 1). While these are theoretically distinct, they are often difﬁcult to

11For APA, s. 8.14, entitled ‘Sharing Research Data for Veriﬁcation’, states that ‘(a) After research results are published, psychologists do not withhold the data on which their conclusions are based from other competent professionals who seek to verify the substantive claims through reanalysis and who intend to use such data only for that purpose, provided that the conﬁdentiality of the participants can be protected and unless legal rights concerning proprietary data preclude their release. This does not preclude psychologists from requiring that such individuals or groups be responsible for costs associated with the provision of such information. (b) Psychologists who request data from other psychologists to verify the substantive claims through reanalysis may use shared data only for the declared purpose. Requesting psychologists obtain prior written agreement for all other uses of the data’ (Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct 2002: 1071). The analogous statement by ASA is in s. 13.05, entitled ‘Data Sharing’ (American Sociological Association 1999).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

distinguish empirically. For example, in Pridemore’s (2008) article, the r for GDP per capita and infant mortality was –0.83. In Messner’s (1989) analysis, the r for per capita GNP (ln) and infant mortality was –0.81 and infant mortality’s r forhis development index was –0.92 (Messner, personal communication, 21 February 2007). Similarly, in the present analyses, the GNP measures were dropped from the ﬁnal models including both poverty and inequality due to high levels of multicollinearity (though it is important to point out that the inferences for poverty and inequality remained the same when it was included). Thus, it is curious that many studies have found an inequality–homicide association when controlling for development/general economic well-being (via GDP/GNP), since the latter is so often highly correlated with indicators of poverty, but that when the proxy for poverty is included here, the inequality–homicide association disappears.

This may be associated more generally with the fact that the inﬂuence of multicollinearity on substantive inferences can be problematic due to partialing (Gordon 1968; Land et al. 1990). When the multiple regression model is estimated with two highly correlated variables, X1 (e.g. inequality) and X2 (e.g. poverty), much of the effect on Y of X1 can be allocated to X2 if the latter has the higher correlation with Y. This can result in a signiﬁcant test statistic for X2 and a null test statistic for X1 when, in fact, both may be associated with Y. This possibility, however, proves the point of the present article. That is, the mission here is not to argue for poverty and against inequality, but instead to point out that the strong conclusions drawn thus far about the latter may not be warranted without further careful research.12

Conclusion

Nearly every cross-national study of social structure and homicide published in the last three decades found an inequality–homicide association. This led to strong conclusions about this relationship and widespread acceptance of its existence. Yet, while many studies controlled for general economic well-being, none included a control for poverty. This is questionable given the focus on the criminogenic effects of poverty in the theoretical literature and the repeated ﬁndings of a poverty–homicide association in the US empirical literature. This incongruence between the related cross-national and US studies has not been addressed in the literature. In order to correct for this omission, a proxy for poverty was included in models replicated from prior careful cross-national studies of social structure and homicide. The results were clear: the poverty–homicide association held in all cases when controlling for inequality, while the inequality–homicide association disappeared in two of three cases when controlling for poverty.

This study provides important contributions to the literature. First, it presents results consistent with Pridemore (2008; see also Pare´ and Felson 2010) using independent data, thus providing convergent validity to recent research ﬁndings. Second, these results help to align the ﬁndings from the US and cross-national empirical literatures that before were highly incongruent in terms of the effects of relative and absolute deprivation on homicide rates. Third, all this was done in a straightforward manner by

12While it is beyond the scope of the current article, some may argue that the recurring problem of multicollinearity in these studies raises questions about the viability of this genre of study, at least until more speciﬁc and independent measures can be found or created. Another critique of this genre includes questions about the efﬁcacy of including wealthy Western nations and developing nations in the same analysis.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

replicating two prior important studies and simply adding a proxy for poverty to their models. Finally, this type of replication and extension is crucial to the accumulation of knowledge, especially in the social sciences, and the process itself is informative and often revealing. In this case, for example, we discovered important limitations related todata sharing thatcould have implications for the scientiﬁcrecord onthisphenomenon.

The intention here is not to argue that inequality is unimportant or that poverty is a theoretically superior explanation of the variation in national homicide rates. Rather, the aim of this paper is to point out the inconsistencies between the cross-national and US literatures on social structure and homicide and to suggest that we may not know as much as we think we know about the deprivation–homicide connection at the national level. The results of the various analyses presented here suggest that the inequality– homicide association at the cross-national level is neither as strong nor as consistent as previously thought. This means that the strong conclusions drawn thus far about the inequality–homicide association may need to be reassessed, since it may be a spurious result of model misspeciﬁcation. Though contrary to ﬁndings from prior crossnational studies, the conclusions drawn here are congruent with what we know about poverty, inequality and violence from US studies, and thus begin to reconcile the previously disparate ﬁndings from the cross-national and US literatures on social structure and homicide.

Acknowledgements

I thank Jukka Savolainen and Daniel Lederman for providing me with the data necessary to replicate their studies, Jeff Gruenewald and Krista Eckhardt for their invaluable research assistance, and Jukka Savolainen, Colin Loftin and Steve Messner for their comments on and critiques of earlier drafts of this manuscript. I also thank Paul Pare´ for sharing his dissertation with me. Paul’s careful work deserves equal credit, as our discoveries were simultaneous and without the knowledge of each other’s research.

Pridemore (N = 46) Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile Costa Rica Czech Rep. Denmark Dominican Rep. Ecuador El Salvador Finland France

Appendix A: Nations Used in the Three Studies

Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latvia Lithuania Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Norway Panama

Paraguay Peru Poland Portugal Russia Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Thailand UK US Uruguay Venezuela

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Fajnzylber et al. (N = 39) Australia Belgium Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Denmark Dominican Republic Finland France Germany

Greece Hong Kong Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Mauritius Mexico The Netherlands New Zealand Norway Panama Peru Philippines

Poland Romania Singapore Spain Sri Thailand Trinidad and Tobago United Kingdom United States Venezuela

Note: in Appendix B, Table B1, Fajnzylber et al. list Dominica as one of the nations included in their homicide analysis. It is clear from the data they provided to me, however, that they actually used the Dominican Republic and not Dominica.

Savolainen (N = 32) Australia AustriaBrazil Bulgaria Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador El Salvador Finland France Germany Hungary

Ireland Israel Latvia Lithuania Mexico The Netherlands Nicaragua Norway Panama Paraguay Poland Romania Spain Sweden United Kingdom United States

References

American Sociological Association (1999), Code of Ethics and Policies and Procedures of the ASA Committee on Professional Ethics. Washington, DC: Author. Antonovsky, A. and Bernstein, J. (1977), ‘Social Class and Infant Mortality’, Social Science and Medicine, 11: 453–70. Avison, W. R. and Loring, P. L. (1986), ‘Population Diversity and Cross-National Homicide: The Effects of Inequality and Heterogeneity’, Criminology, 24: 733–49.

- Bennet, R. R. (1991a), ‘Development and Crime: A Cross-National, Time-Series Analysis of Competing Models’, Sociological Quarterly, 32: 343–63.
- Bennet, R. R. (1991b), ‘Routine Activities: A Cross-National Assessment of a Criminological Perspective’, Social Forces, 70: 147–63.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Bennet, R. R. and Lynch, J. P. (1990), ‘Does a Difference Make a Difference? Comparing Cross-National Crime Indicators’, Criminology, 28: 153–82. Blau, J. R. and Blau, P. M. (1982), ‘The Cost of Inequality: Metropolitan Structure and Violent Crime’, American Sociological Review, 47: 114–29. Braithwaite, J. (1979), Inequality, Crime, and Public Policy. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Braithwaite, J. and Braithwaite, V. (1980), ‘The Effect of Income Inequality and Social Democracy on Homicide’, British Journal of Criminology, 20: 45–53.

Burnside, C. and Dollar, D. (1998), ‘Aid, the Incentive Regime, and Poverty Reduction’, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1937, available online at http://ssrn. com/abstract=597236.

Chamlin, M. B. and Cochran, J. K. (2005), ‘Ascribed Economic Inequality and Homicide among Modern Societies: Toward the Development of a Cross-National Theory’, Homicide Studies, 9: 3–29.

Conklin, G. H. and Simpson, M. E. (1985), ‘A Demographic Approach to the Cross-National Study of Homicide’, Comparative Social Research, 8: 171–85. Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (2002), American Psychologist, 57: 1060–73. Fajnzylber, P., Lederman, D. and Loayza, N. (2002), ‘Inequality and Violent Crime’, Journal of Law and Economics, 45: 1–39. Fiala, R. and LaFree, G. (1988), ‘Cross-National Determinants of Child Homicide’, American Sociological Review, 33: 432–45.

Firebaugh, G. and Beck, F. (1994), ‘Does Economic Growth Beneﬁt the Masses: Growth, Dependence, and Welfare in the Third World’, American Sociological Review, 59: 631–54. Frey, R. S. and Field, C. (2000), ‘The Determinants of Infant Mortality in the Less Developed World: A Cross-Sectional Test of Five Theories’, Social Indicators Research, 52: 215–35. Gartner, R. (1991), ‘Family Structure, Welfare Spending, and Child Homicide in Devel-

oped Democracies’, Journal of Marriage and the Family, 53: 231–40. Gartner, R., Baker, K. and Pampel, F. C. (1990), ‘Gender Stratiﬁcation and the Gender Gap in Homicide Victimization’, Social Problems, 37: 593–612. Goldman, N. (2001), ‘Social Inequalities in Health: Disentangling the Underlying Mechanisms’, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 954: 118–39. Gordon, R. A. (1968), ‘Issues in Multiple Regression’, American Journal of Sociology, 73: 592–616. Groves, W. B., McCleary, R. and Newman, G. R. (1985), ‘Religion, Modernization, and World Crime’, Comparative Social Research, 8: 59–78. Hansmann, H. B. and Quigley, J. M. (1982), ‘Population Heterogeneity and the Sociogenesis of Homicide’, Social Forces, 61: 206–24. Hartnagel, T. F. (1982), ‘Modernization, Female Social Roles, and Female Crime: A CrossNational Investigation’, Sociological Quarterly, 23: 477–90.

Hsiegh, C.-C. and Pugh, M. D. (1993), ‘Poverty, Income Inequality, and Violent Crime: A Meta-Analysis of Recent Aggregate Data Studies’, Criminal Justice Review, 18: 182–202.

Huang, W. S. (1995), ‘A Cross-National Analysis on the Effect of Moral Individualism on Murder Rates’, International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 39: 53–75.

Huang, W. S. W (2001), ‘A Research Note on Reporting Discrepancies in International Homicide Data’, International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice, 25: 167–81.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Jacobs, D. and Richardson, A. M. (2008), ‘Economic Inequality and Homicide in the Developed Nations from 1975 to 1995’, Homicide Studies, 12: 28–45. Kawachi, I. and Berkman, L. F., eds (2003), Neighborhoods and Health. New York: Oxford University Press. Kick, E. L. and LaFree, G. D. (1985), ‘The Social Context of Murder and Theft’, Comparative Social Research, 8: 37–58. Kim, S. W. and Pridemore, W. A. (2005), ‘Poverty, Socioeconomic Change, Institutional Anomie, and Homicide’, Social Science Quarterly, 86: 1377–98.

Krahn, H., Hartnagel, T. F. and Gartrell, J. W. (1986), ‘Income Inequality and Homicide Rates: Cross-National Data and Criminological Theories’, Criminology, 24: 269–95.

Krohn, M. D. (1976), ‘Inequality, Unemployment and Crime: A Cross-National Analysis’, Sociological Quarterly, 17: 303–13. Krohn, M. D. (1978), ‘A Durkheimian Analysis of International Crime Rates’, Social Forces, 57: 654–70.

Krohn, M. D. and Wellford, C. F. (1977), ‘A Static and Dynamic Analysis of Crime and the Primary Dimensions of Nations’, International Journal of Criminology and Penology, 5: 1–16.

LaFree, G. (1999), ‘A Summary and Review of Cross-National Comparative Studies of Homicide’, in M. D. Smith and M. A. Zahn, eds, Homicide: A Sourcebook of Social Research, 125–

45. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

LaFree, G. and Kick, E. L. (1986), ‘Cross-National Effects of Developmental, Distributional, and Demographic Variables on Crime: A Review and Analysis’, International Annals of Criminology, 24: 213–35.

Land, K. C., McCall, P. L. and Cohen, L. E. (1990), ‘Structural Covariates of Homicide Rates: Are There Any Invariances across Time and Social Space?’, American Journal of Sociology, 95: 922–63.

Landau, S. F. (1984), ‘Trends in Violence and Aggression: A Cross-Cultural Analysis’, International Journal of Comparative Sociology, 25: 133–58. Lee, M. (2001), ‘Population Growth, Economic Inequality, and Homicide’, Deviant Behavior: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 22: 491–516. Loftin, C. and Parker, R. N. (1985), ‘An Errors-in-Variable Model of the Effect of Poverty on Urban Homicide Rates’, Criminology, 23: 269–87.

Marmot, M. G., Bobak, M. and Smith, G. D. (1995), ‘Explanations for Social Inequalities in Health’, in B. C. Amick, S. Levine, A. R. Tarlov and D. C. Walsh, eds, Society and Health. New York: Oxford University Press.

McDonald, L. R. (1976), The Sociology of Law and Order. Montreal: The Book Center. McDowall, D. (1986), ‘Poverty and Homicide in Detroit, 1926–1978’, Violence and Victims, 1:

23–34. Messner, S. F. (1980), ‘Income Inequality and Murder Rates: Some Cross-Sectional Findings’, Comparative Social Research, 3: 185–98. Messner, S. F. (1982), ‘Poverty, Inequality, and the Urban Homicide Rate: Some Unexpected Findings’, Criminology, 20: 103–14. Messner, S. F. (1985), ‘Sex Differences in Arrest Rates for Homicide: An Application of the General Theory of Structural Strain’, Comparative Social Research, 8: 187–201. Messner, S. F. (1989), ‘Economic Discrimination and Societal Homicide Rates: Further Evidence on the Cost of Inequality’, American Sociological Review, 54: 597–611.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Messner, S. F. and Rosenfeld, R. (1997), ‘Political Restraint of the Market and Levels of Criminal Homicide: A Cross-National Application of Institutional–Anomie Theory’, Social Forces, 75: 1393–416.

Messner, S. F. and Rosenfeld, R. (1999), ‘Social Structure and Homicide: Theory and Research’, in M. D. Smith and M. A. Zahn, eds, Homicide: A Sourcebook of Social Research, 27–41. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Messner, S. F. and Rosenfeld, R. (2006), Crime and the American Dream, 4th edn, Belmont, CA: Wasdworth.

Messner, S. F., Raffalovich, L. E. and Shrock, P. (2002), ‘Reassessing the Cross-National Relationship between Inequality and Homicide Rates: Implications of Data Quality Control in the Measurement of Income Distribution’, Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 18: 377–95.

Messner, S. F., Raffalovich, L. E. and Sutton, G. M. (2010 forthcoming), ‘Poverty, Infant Mortality, and Homicide Rates in Cross-National Perspective: Assessments of Criterion and Conduct Validity’, Criminology.

Neapolitan, J. L. (1994), ‘Cross-National Variation in Homicides: The Case of Latin America’, International Criminal Justice Review, 4: 4–22. Neapolitan, J. L. (1996), ‘Cross-National Crime Data: Some Unaddressed Problems’, Journal of Crime and Justice, 19: 95–112. Neapolitan, J. L. (1998), ‘Cross-National Variation in Homicide: Is Race a Factor?’, Criminology, 36: 139–56.

Neumayer, E. (2003), ‘Good Policy Can Lower Violent Crime: Evidence from Fixed Effects Estimation in a Cross-National Panel of Homicide Rates, 1980–97’, Journal of Peace Research, 40: 619–40.

Ortega, S. T., Corzine, J., Burnett, C. and Poyer, T. (1992), ‘Modernization, Age Structure,

and Regional Context: A Cross-National Study of Crime’, Sociological Spectrum, 12: 257–77. Pare´, P.-P. (2006), ‘Income Inequality and Crime across Nations Reexamined’, unpub-

lished doctoral dissertation, Pennsylvania State University: University Park, PA. Pare´, P.-P. and Felson, R. B. (2010), ‘Income Inequality, Poverty, and Crime across Nations Reexamined’, manuscript currently under review. Pratt, T. C. and Cullen, F. T. (2005), ‘Assessing Macro-Level Predictors and Theories of Crime: A Meta-Analysis’, Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, 32: 373–450.

- Pratt, T. C. and Godsey, T. W. (2002), ‘Social Support and Homicide: A Cross-National Test of an Emerging Criminological Theory’, Journal of Criminal Justice, 30: 589–601.
- Pratt, T. C. and Godsey, T. W. (2003), ‘Social Support, Inequality, and Homicide: A CrossNational Test of an Integrated Theoretical Model’, Criminology, 41: 611–43.


Pridemore, W. A. (2002), ‘What We Know about Social Structure and Homicide: A Review of the Theoretical and Empirical Literature’, Violence and Victims, 17: 127–56. Pridemore, W. A. (2008), ‘A First Test of the Poverty–Homicide Hypothesis at the CrossNational Level’, Criminology, 46: 133–54.

Pridemore, W. A. and Trent, C. L. S. (2010), ‘Do the Invariant Findings of Land, McCall, and Cohen Generalize to Cross-National Studies of Social Structure and Homicide’, Homicide Studies, 14: 296–335.

Quinney, R. (1965), ‘Suicide, Homicide, and Economic Development’, Social Forces, 43: 401–6. Reddy, S. G. and Pogge, T. (2005), ‘How Not to Count the Poor’, available online at http:// ssrn.com/abstract=893159.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

Rosenfeld, R. and Messner, S. F. (1991), ‘The Social Sources of Homicide in Different Types of Societies’, Sociological Forum, 6: 51–70. Ross, M. (2006), ‘Is Democracy Good for the Poor?’, American Journal of Political Science, 50: 860–74.

Sampson, R. J. and Lauritsen, J. L. (1994), ‘Violent Victimization and Offending: Individual-, Situational-, and Community-Level Risk Factors’, in A. J. Reiss Jr. and J. A. Roth, eds, Understanding and Preventing Violence, Vol. 3: Social Inﬂuences, 1–114. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Savolainen, J. (2000), ‘Inequality, Welfare State, and Homicide: Further Support for the Institutional Anomie Theory’, Criminology, 38: 1021–42. Shichor, D. (1990), ‘Crime Patterns and Socioeconomic Development: A Cross-National Analysis’, Criminal Justice Review, 15: 64–78. Steffensmeier, D., Allan, E. and Streifel, C. (1989), ‘Development and Female Crime: A Cross-National Test of Alternative Explanations’, Social Forces, 68: 262–83.

Strait, J. B. (2006), ‘An Epidemiology of Neighborhood Poverty: Causal Factors of Infant Mortality among Blacks and Whites in the Metropolitan United States’, Professional Geographer, 58: 39–53.

United Nations Development Programme (2006), Human Development Report 2006. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Unnithan, N. P. and Whitt, H. P. (1992), ‘Inequality, Economic Development and Lethal Violence: A Cross-Sectional Analysis of Suicide and Violence’, International Journal of Comparative Sociology, 33: 182–95.

Wellford, C. F. (1974), ‘Crime and the Dimensions of Nations’, International Journal of Criminology and Penology, 2: 1–10. Wilkinson, R. (2004), ‘Why Is Violence More Common where Inequality Is Greater?’, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1036: 1–12. Wolf, P. (1971), ‘Crime and Development: An International Comparison of Crime Rates’, Scandinavian Studies in Criminology, 3: 107–20.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/51/5/739/515897 by University of Cambridge user on 22 March 2026

