doi:10.1093/bjc/azt018 BRIT. J. CRIMINOL. (2013) 53, 864–885 Advance Access publication 13 May 2013

## A FRAMEWORK TO ASSESS THE HARMS OF CRIMES

Victoria A. Greenfield and Letizia Paoli*

Despite the centrality of harm to crime and criminalization and increasing interest in harm as a basis for crime-control policy, the criminological community has yet done little to systematically reflect on criminal harms or their identification, evaluation and comparison. This paper presents a newly developed framework with which to systematize the empirical assessment of such harms and address at least some of the attendant conceptual and technical challenges. It also suggests several roles for the framework in policy making. Our conclusions are twofold: it is possible to reliably evaluate the harms of criminal activities, as our examples suggest, but it is not possible—for both conceptual and technical reasons—to develop an encompassing estimate of the total harms of these activities.

Keywords: crime, harm, crime-control policy, cost of crime, perceived seriousness of crime

Introduction

Despite growing concern for victims of crime among the general public, policy makers and academics (e.g. Spalek 2006; Walklate 2007), neither criminology nor the adjacent social sciences have made a serious effort to systematically identify, evaluate or compare the harms associated with different crimes—broadly understood as violations of stakeholders’ legitimate interests1—as distinct from the perceived seriousness or costs of crime. Policy makers and academics have tended to view crime as a ‘harm’ in its own right, making few attempts to distinguish the consequences of one criminal activity from another.

More recently, members of wide-ranging policy communities, including that of crime control, have turned their attention to harm reduction as a goal (Sparrow 2008). Several national and regional policy-making and law-enforcement agencies are considering harm as a basis for prioritizing and targeting criminal activities. The United Kingdom offers the clearest example: ‘... the overarching aim of the [Organised Crime] Control Strategy is to achieve a tangible and lasting reduction in the harm caused to the UK by organised crime’ (SOCA 2008: n.p.).2 Agencies in other nations—such as the Australian Crime Commission, the Canadian Criminal Intelligence Service, the Belgian Justice and Home Affairs Ministries, and the Dutch Ministry of Justice—are

* Letizia Paoli, LINC, Leuven Institute of Criminology, University of Leuven Faculty of Law, Hooverplein 10–11, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium; Letizia.Paoli@law.kuleuven.be; Victoria A. Greenfield, RAND Corporation, Arlington, VA 22202–5050, USA; victoria_greenfield@rand.org.

- 1 Ashworth (2006: 30–1) and Feinberg (1984: 31–6), for example, address harms to ‘people’ and focus on traditional interper-

sonal crime. For our delineation of stakeholders, which refers to bearers of harms and is somewhat broader, and our definition of interests, see below.

- 2 Whether SOCA’s successor agency, the National Crime Agency, will maintain this position remains to be determined.


A Home Office (2011) planning document continues to embrace the concept of harm, but the new agency, which will be formally stood up in 2013, has not yet—at the time of this writing—released a formal operating strategy.

864

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Centre for Crime and Justice Studies (ISTD). All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

considering related approaches (Dorn and van de Bunt 2010; Tusikov 2012; van der Beken et al. 2012). Within the European Union (EU) bureaucracy, the past decade’s shift in emphasis from ‘organized’ crime to a combination of organized and ‘serious’ crime (e.g. Council of the European Union 2002; 2009) also resonates with harm (Dorn 2009).

Largely independent of these policy developments, some critical criminologists (e.g. Hillyard and Tombs 2004) have proposed replacing the notion of crime with that of social harm and making the reduction of social harm the key goal of broader social policy, not just crime control—but offer little practical guidance.

More fundamentally, in criminal law theory, the harm ‘caused’ by a criminal activity is considered crucial to justify the very criminalization of such activity, the penalties assigned to it by lawmakers and the penalties imposed on single offenders by judges (e.g. Ashworth 2006: 30–9). However, such assessments are not empirically based and indeed mostly remain implicit (Ashworth 2006).

The increasing interest in harm-based approaches to crime-control policy implies a need for sound methods to systematically assess the harms of criminal activities, but identifying, evaluating and comparing such harms present substantial conceptual and technical challenges. In another paper (Paoli and Greenfield 2013), we review the status of harm in crime-control policy and the literature on the harms of crime and related concepts and, on this basis, identify the major conceptual and technical challenges associated with assessing the harms of crime.

In this paper, we develop a framework, consisting of a set of tools and a multistep analytical process, with which to systematize the empirical assessment of harm and address at least some of those challenges. In the first section, we introduce the framework and explain its origins. In the second, third and fourth sections, we present three tools of the framework (i.e. the taxonomy, scales and matrix) and the process. For illustrative purposes, we interweave examples from an application of the framework to wholesale cocaine trafficking (hereafter referred to as ‘cocaine trafficking’) in Belgium (Paoli et al. 2013). Noting that the framework and application derive from a larger project on organized crime, undertaken to help policy makers and law-enforcement agencies establish strategic, long-term priorities in organized crime control (see Vander Beken et al. 2012), we discuss the potential roles of the framework in policy analysis in the fifth section. We conclude, in the sixth section, with remarks on the strengths and weaknesses of our approach.

Origins and Components of the Framework

We developed our framework in response to an evident need for a systematic, empirically based approach to assessing harms—in particular, one capable of responding to the conceptual and technical challenges that would inevitably greet such an effort. Chief among the challenges are those of morality, cultural and socio-economic variability, subjectivity, infinitude, causality, standardization, quantification and incommensurability. Paoli and Greenfield (2013) discuss these challenges at length. In this paper, we summarize the challenges to ground our presentation of the framework. As that presentation unfolds in the second to fourth sections, we explain how each component of the framework responds to each challenge.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

The challenges of morality, variability and subjectivity result from the inherently normative nature of calling something a ‘harm’ in the first place. The decision to apply this label depends on the identification of ‘legitimate’ interests according to the ‘dominant political morality’ (MacCormick 1982: 30), which, in turn, depends on a society’s cultural and socio-economic arrangements.

Questions of legitimacy pertain not just to interests, per se, but to claimants and their sometimes competing perspectives on the consequences of criminal activities. Here, we highlight two related questions. First, should all claimants be treated as equally legitimate? That is, should harms to all individuals, entities, etc. count with the same weight or importance, regardless of their status, be they victims or perpetrators? Second, how should we address outcomes that might look like harms from one claimant’s perspective and benefits from another? For example, a crime, such as drug production or trafficking, might generate revenues that benefit not just perpetrators, but also the larger economy.

The challenges of infinitude and causality are related. That of infinitude arises from the infeasibility of creating an exhaustive list of harms. First, it is impossible to identify and assess all harms a priori and, second, a list that includes ancillary effects could, in practice, go on forever. The challenge of causality, also referred to as the problem of ‘remote harms’ (Ashworth 2006: 49–50; Ryberg 2004: 64–5), arises from the temporal, spatial and behavioural distance that can separate conduct from consequences. Remote harms stand in such a relation to a conduct that it is not clear whether they should be ascribed to that conduct; for example, drug trafficking triggers events that are harmful, in part, because of the intervening choices of other actors (e.g. dealers and users).

The remaining challenges of standardization, quantification and incommensurability might be regarded as somewhat more ‘technical’ than the others, but are nevertheless also ‘conceptual’. Even though the hurtfulness of a crime depends on the specific situation of the victim, no broad-based empirical study can fully assess the harms to each victim separately. Some standardization, at least for individuals, therefore, seems unavoidable. The problems of quantification and incommensurability can be stated even more simply. Not everything that matters can be quantified, nor can it be measured or compared according to a common standard (Caulkins and Reuter 1997: 1148; Caulkins et al. 2011). To omit those things that cannot be quantified, let alone compared, is tantamount to assigning them a societal weight of ‘zero’.

Taking on each of these challenges, in turn, our framework allows for the identification, evaluation and, within limits, qualitative comparison of the harms associated with wide-ranging criminal activities. It consists of a set of tools and a multistep process with which to apply them; specifically, it draws together a model of the criminal activity, a taxonomy of the types and bearers of harms, scales for evaluating the severity and incidence of harms, and a matrix for prioritizing harms. The process begins with the development of a ‘business model’ that depicts the typical logistics or modus operandi of a criminal activity and provides a strong evidentiary base for identifying possible harms, evaluating their severity and incidence, prioritizing them and establishing their causality (see figure 1).

In constructing our framework, we draw heavily from the literature on criminal harm assessment, most notably von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991). Albeit exclusively focusing on

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Rate severity of harm (scale)

Construct business model

Identify possible harms and bearers (Taxonomy)

Evaluate severity and incidence of harm

Prioritize harms (matrix)

Rate incidence of criminal activity and of harm in relation to criminal activity (scale)

Establish causality of harm

Potential roles in policy analysis

Fig. 1 Harm assessment process. First published in Paoli et al. (2013).

individuals, the two legal theorists offer the most structured attempt to categorize the harms of crime we know of, one which Ashworth (2006: 37) describes as ‘pathbreaking’. In their paper, ‘Gauging Criminal Harm: A Living Standard Analysis’, they focus on the damages associated with common interpersonal crimes, such as theft, burglary and assault (von Hirsch and Jareborg 1991: 3–4) and develop guidelines for assessing the standard impact that a crime has on the immediate victim’s ‘standard of living’. This is defined, following Sen (1987), as the ‘economic means’ and ‘non-economic capabilities’ for achieving a certain quality of life (Sen 1987: 7, 10–11) and serves in both von Hirsch and Jareborg’s and our framework as the benchmark for assessing the severity of the harms.3

In addition, we borrow insights from the literatures of other policy-oriented communities, specifically the drug policy community (e.g. MacCoun et al. 1996; MacCoun and Reuter 2001; Newcombe 1992) and, less predictably, the national security community (e.g. Greenfield and Camm 2005). The national security community, faced with concerns about ‘bad consequences’ in military operations—and many similar conceptual and technical challenges—has long used a risk-management tool that bears direct relevance to our effort (see Greenfield and Paoli 2012).

Although we initially developed the framework as part of a larger project focusing on organized crime, our approach is not specific to either organized crime or its activities. In the context of that project, we tested the framework with applications to cocaine

3 Von Hirsch, Ashworth and Jareborg (2005) restate the approach with modest revisions.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

trafficking, human trafficking, VAT fraud, and tobacco smuggling and counterfeiting, but we believe it is applicable to many other crimes. As we discuss later, in the context of policy analysis, the framework might also be used to better assess whether certain activities merit criminalization.

Taxonomy of Bearers and Types of Possible Harms

We have constructed a two-dimensional taxonomy of the possible harms associated with criminal activities: one dimension addresses the bearers of harm and the other addresses the types of harm. Our taxonomy distinguishes among bearers in four different classes, consisting of individuals; private-sector entities, including businesses and non-governmental organizations (NGOs); government entities; and the environment, both physical and social (see Table 1). Harms can take the form of damages to functional integrity, material interests, reputation or privacy, but not all types of harm are relevant to all classes of bearers.

Whereas some classification systems include ‘the community’ as an independent bearer (e.g. Newcombe 1992; SOCA 2010), we try to allocate ‘communal’ harms to their ultimate bearers, including the individuals, businesses, NGOs and government agencies that compose a community. For reasons that we discuss below, we also treat the environment as a bearer. Similarly, we allocate harms to ‘the economy’ to the actors and entities that compose the economy. In this regard, we differ substantially from Kopp and Besson (2009) and Dorn and van de Bunt (2010), who speak to ‘systemic’ harms. For Kopp and Besson (2009: 312), systemic harms encompass all harms that do not directly affect individuals. Our approach requires additional care in allocating the harms that Kopp and Besson and others would call ‘systemic’such as decreases in local real estate prices resulting from drug dealing—to their ultimate bearers.

In some instances, however, we acknowledge that we have only identified the ‘nearultimate’ bearers of harms. For example, many or most harms borne by the government, private-sector entities and the environment are borne ultimately by individuals, such as taxpayers, shareholders, employees and residents. But, given the practical realities of data availability and analytical complexities, it would be difficult, if not impossible, to derive results at the individual level for all such harms.

Table 1 Bearers and types of harms

Bearer of harm Individuals Private-sector entities Government entities Environment

Type of harm Functional integrity X* X** X** X*** Material interest X X X n/a Reputation X X X n/a Privacy X X X n/a

Notes: X, applicable; n/a, not applicable; * functional integrity consists of physical and psychological integrity; ** functional integrity consists of operational integrity; *** functional integrity consists of physical, operational and aesthetic integrity. First published in Paoli et al. (2013).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

For individuals, we delineate types of harms much as von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991) delineate them,4 but note three divergences: we expand the category of ‘physical integrity’, which we rename ‘functional integrity’, to include both physical and psychological losses; we consolidate another category; and we add a new category, namely that of ‘reputation’.5 Violations of functional integrity may result in physical and psychological losses, bounded by death at one extreme and by momentary pain, discomfort or anxiety6 at the other. Psychological damages may occur along with physical injuries or separately and might arise from humiliation, which von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991) treat as a separate category, and affronts to dignity. Material interests can run the gamut from the most basic means of subsistence to the amenities of modest comfort and luxury. Damages to ‘reputation’—a category of our own initiative, but deriving from legal precedent—arise from actions or events affecting others’ view of the individual. They might involve instances of mistreatment or exploitation, as could occur in cases of human trafficking, or stem from instances of physical assault, verbal harassment or mere association. A violation of privacy, such as an unauthorized entry or the control of personal documents, such as a passport, might occur in a burglary, kidnapping or case of human trafficking.

We delineate the harms to private-sector entities, government entities and the environment analogously. For example, under the category of ‘functional integrity’, a business, NGO or government body would suffer a loss of operational integrity, rather than a loss of physical or psychological integrity. A business or NGO might experience a material loss as a loss of value in their balance sheet, possibly concurrent with other damages, whereas governments might suffer a loss of tax revenue. A business, NGO or government body might also suffer a loss of ‘privacy’. Unauthorized access to and possible misuse of the entity’s premises or sensitive or proprietary information might render it less able to pursue its institutional interests. Such unauthorized access might occur in cases of burglary or VAT fraud, during which business documents, official documents and other data are especially vulnerable, such as through falsification. Damage to a business, NGO or government’s reputation can occur under a variety of circumstances, including those involving an employee, official or representative’s participation in a criminal activity, but we argue that such entities experience at least some reputational loss whenever rule- or lawbreaking leaves the impression that they are weak.

For the environment, which we divide according to physical and social dimensions, we limit the analysis to functional integrity, consisting of physical, operational and aesthetic integrity. It might be possible to trace some of these harms to individuals or entities; however, in many settings, including those in which environmental property rights—and attendant responsibilities for management and oversight—lack clear delineation, that attribution would be complex at best. Concerns about the physical environment include air, water and soil pollution; noise and light pollution; inaccessibility of open spaces; and obstruction or destruction of landscapes. Concerns about

- 4 Von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991: 19) posit four interest dimensions: physical integrity, material support and amenity, freedom

from humiliation and privacy or autonomy.

- 5 The inclusion of psychological losses accords with the prevailing opinion of the drug-related harm literature. See, for exam-


ple, MacDonald et al. (2005), MacCoun et al. (1996), MacCoun and Reuter (2001) and Newcombe (1992). Victimologists also stress the relevance of the psychological and emotional impact of victimization (e.g. Spalek 2006).

6 Here, we use the term ‘anxiety’ colloquially.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

the social environment include public nuisance, social fragmentation and community disassociation. Drug dealing might, for example, create a persistent public nuisance, resulting in the de facto appropriation of public spaces. The remaining categories of harm, namely harms to material interests, reputation and privacy, are either inapplicable or duplicative.

In constructing the taxonomy, we have tried to account for at least some of the challenges of cultural and socio-economic variability, subjectivity, infinitude and causality that greet harm assessment.

Seeking to allow for difference in societal values and socio-economic conditions, we speak of ‘possible’ harms and, for the most part, allow policy makers the latitude to decide whether certain consequences of criminal activities should be considered harmful and whether certain individuals or entities (e.g. offenders) should be deemed legitimate bearers of harms.

Acknowledging the problem of infinitude, we have attempted to construct a broadly inclusive taxonomy, but we make no claim that it is exhaustive.

Reflecting our initial interest in organized crime, our taxonomy also accommodates complex criminal endeavours, involving multiple interrelated activities. It can be used, for example, to identify the harms associated with a primary criminal activity, such as cocaine trafficking; the harms associated with ‘accompanying’ activities, such as money laundering, corruption and the use or threat of violence, that might facilitate or occur along with the primary activity;7 and the harms associated with downstream activities, such as drug dealing and use, that are at least partially ‘enabled’ by the primary activity. The harms of ‘enabled’ activities constitute remote harms because they are mediated by the choices of victims and others along the supply chain.

Lastly, recognizing that the strength of the causal link between an activity or event and any subsequent harm might vary significantly and require thorough analysis, our taxonomy does not presume causality; rather, it lists the possible harms ‘associated with’ a criminal activity. Some harms might emerge directly from that activity or event. Others might be ‘remote’, as defined above, or accumulative (von Hirsch and Jareborg 1991: 65–6); that is, they arise only if the act triggering the harm is combined with similar actions (e.g. as in the case of repeated VAT fraud). Still others might derive not from the activity itself, but from the policy environment.

Notwithstanding our emphasis on breadth and inclusivity, we set four noteworthy bounds on our assessments of cocaine trafficking, human trafficking, VAT fraud, and tobacco smuggling and counterfeiting in Belgium.

First, we excluded material losses that occur when one criminal steals another’s illegally obtained or inherently illegal possessions and the harms to wholly illegal enterprises or shell companies.

Second, we excluded any benefits associated with the activities. Although advocating ‘full accounting’ as an aspirational goal (see Greenfield and Paoli 2012), we chose to focus on gross harms in our initial applications to Belgian crime. Were we to assess the harms of other activities (e.g. human smuggling) in other places (e.g. Afghanistan, in the case of opium production), that approach could seriously skew our findings.

7 The decision to include accompanying activities implies that perpetrators might, themselves, constitute the bearers of the harms of some accompanying activities. Victimologists have long recognized striking similarities between the victim and offender populations and, in the case of violent crime, frequent overlap (see Fattah 1992: 32–3).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Third, we excluded law-enforcement costs. This decision goes against frequent practice in the cost-of-crime literature (e.g. Cohen 2005), but is not without precedent in the criminological literature. The logic behind our decision is thus: if law-enforcement costs were added, then the criminal activities that are already most heavily prioritized by law-enforcement agencies—as reflected in the agencies’ funding—would likely appear to be more harmful than others that have been less heavily prioritized, thereby creating a vicious cycle. As Levi and Burrows (2008: 294) observe, the inclusion of lawenforcement costs can yield paradoxical results, ‘if one includes the costs of responses to crime as part of the “costs of crime”, the less that is done about them, the lower are the “costs of crime”‘. Funding is not a direct measure of harm; rather, it reflects a society’s concern about the harm (see Dorn and van de Bunt 2010: 9).

Fourth, and along similar lines, we excluded costs incurred by private entities or individuals to protect themselves from crime. Individuals, and in most cases businesses and NGOs, do not assess the threat of each criminal activity separately, making it impossible to identify, let alone estimate, the costs of efforts to prevent each particular activity. Moreover, prevention costs are not solely a function of the inherent ‘toxicity’ of crime itself, but are also a function of the perceptions of individuals and entities. A business, for example, might incur security expenses, for three reasons: an internal desire to hedge risks, the demand from employees and customers for particular protections, and government regulation mandating certain security measures (Jackson et al. 2007: 34–5). Lastly, prevention costs are often bundled together with general compliance and technological systems and it would be very difficult to disentangle them empirically from the costs of these other activities (Levi and Burrows 2008: 310).

We did not, however, exclude costs of repair or replacement. Examples include the costs of healthcare borne by individuals or government entities for treating injuries accruing from criminal activity or the costs of repairing or substituting assets damaged or stolen by criminals, including increases in insurance premiums that might result from repair or replacement.

Two Scales and a Matrix

We have developed two ordinal scales and a matrix that combines them to evaluate the severity and incidence of each harm and to compare results across harms. Our approach to severity draws from von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991) and the national security literature, specifically, Greenfield and Camm (2005); our approach to incidence and our matrix draw only from the latter. Although intending to remain true ‘in spirit’ to these underlying references, we have introduced a handful of modest—hopefully clarifying—changes in wording.

To evaluate severity, we specify a scale with five broad categories, ranging from ‘catastrophic’ to ‘marginal’ (see Table 2). For individual victims, the first four categoriescatastrophic, grave, serious and moderate—correspond to intrusions at each of the four living-standard levels; the fifth category—marginal—pertains when a crime does not encroach substantially at any level. A corollary of using the living standard as a benchmark is that some interest dimensions emerge as more ‘basic’ than others: whereas the violation of an individual’s functional integrity may result in a catastrophic harm, the violation of his or her reputation cannot (see von Hirsch and Jareborg 1991: 21).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Table 2 Benchmarks for severity ratings

Individuals Entities Severity rating Level of living standard at which

Level of mission capability at which damage occurs

damage occurs

Catastrophic 1˚. Subsistence 1˚. Viability Grave 2˚. Minimal standard of living 2˚. Minimal mission capabilities Serious 3˚. Adequate standard of living 3˚. Adequate mission capabilities Moderate 4˚. Enhanced standard of living 4˚. Enhanced mission capabilities Marginal Marginal or no effect at any level Marginal or no effect at any level

Notes: Viability consists of survival, but with maintenance of no more than elementary institutional capacities to function. First published in Paoli et al. (2013).

We apply the same scale to harms to other bearers, but use a standard-of-living analogy for private-sector and government entities. Recalling that ‘living standard’ refers to various ‘means’ and ‘capabilities’, we assess the harms to an entity in relation to its ability to fulfil its ‘mission’, defined as the entity’s raison d’être. In many countries (e.g. the United States), federal, state and local government agencies publish mission statements; they are also common, possibly the norm, among medium and large businesses and NGOs in developed countries. Admittedly, some mission statements amount to image crafting; nevertheless, the underlying concept of an entity’s raison d’être still holds.8

In assessing harms to individuals, we attempt to estimate the standard impact of a criminal activity on the living standard of individual victims, assuming, as do von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991: 4), that ‘injury occurs to someone who is neither especially vulnerable nor resilient’ in the context of the society under consideration. Thus, we do not distinguish between the effects of an event on the basis of an individual’s specific life circumstances: for example, we would treat the loss of a cash-containing wallet identically, regardless of the victim’s wealth.9

In contrast, for other bearers, we consider the level of analysis. A branch or division of a local government agency—or the entire agency—might be heavily affected by corruption, whereas the overall government remains fundamentally intact. The same also applies to the environment. A neighbourhood might be heavily affected by a particular crime, whereas the nation, taken as a whole, might suffer little damage. Given the impossibility of typifying such entities, we try to delineate subclasses when more than one bearer per class is affected. For businesses and NGOs, we might distinguish between small- and medium-scale entities, on the one hand, and large-scale entities on the other. For government entities, we would consider harms to local, regional or central public bodies. For the environment, already specified as either physical or social, we might introduce local, regional, national or global distinctions. In the current project,

- 8 We have not developed an overarching benchmark for the environment. Even if the environment is divided into the sub-

classes of physical and social environment, functional integrity is, in both cases, the only affected interest dimension. We realize that this category is, in itself, very broad and highly differentiated. As none of the four criminal activities so far considered has generated multiple harms to the environment, we have had no opportunity to test this part of the framework.

- 9 Scholars also debate whether the punishment meted out for a crime should reflect and be calibrated upon the different sub-


jective experiences of those who are punished. However, the predominant view is that punishment should be meted on objective grounds, although the convicts’ personal circumstances might be taken into account in debating the role of mercy (see Gray (2010) for a review of the debate and rejection of the subjectivist standpoint).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

we have tried to conduct case-by-case assessments of the harms to private-sector and government entities, but this might not be possible in a context larger than Belgium.

The same criminal activity usually affects more than one interest dimension; that is, it yields different types of harms of possibly different severity. The only clear exception is that of the ‘catastrophic’ harm associated with death, in which case, the victim is no longer able to experience a material, reputational or other loss, though his or her heirs might. Other activities are ‘messier’. An assault, for example, can affect both the victim’s functional integrity and reputation, but it can affect each interest dimension differently. If the assault produces major injuries requiring hospitalization and impinging on an adequate standard of living, the harm to functional integrity may be rated as ‘serious’. If the same assault has only a minimal and fleeting effect on how others view the victim, the reputational harm may be regarded as ‘marginal’.

As these examples demonstrate, a given type of criminal activities, such as violence, may come in different forms. In our analysis, we effectively create subcategories of activities for violence (e.g. murder, rape, petty assault) and corruption (e.g. low-level bribes versus coopting of high-level government representatives), to more precisely assess the severity (and incidence) of each harm and, in the case of accompanying activities, such as violence, to establish a one-to-one correspondence between each subcategory and the harm.

For incidence, we also use a scale with five broad categories: always, persistently, occasionally, seldom and rarely. Our assessment of cocaine trafficking in Belgium, for example, indicates that body-packing10 yields marginal harms ‘occasionally’ and catastrophic harms ‘rarely’; the latter occur with fatal overdoses. If a type of harm is not relevant to a specific activity in a given context, we label it ‘not applicable’. Our Belgian cocaine-trafficking assessment yields no evidence of physical or social environmental harms during import; hence, we regard them as not applicable in that context.

Our prioritization matrix jointly rates the severity and incidence of harms (see Table 3). In combination, these ratings can provide a preliminary basis for prioritizing harms, whereas a severity or incidence rating, alone, cannot.11 For example, a grave harm might seem to merit more attention than a moderate harm, but, if the grave

Table 3 Matrix for prioritizing harms

Severity Incidence Always Persistently Occasionally Seldom Rarely

Catastrophic H H H H/M M/H Grave H H H/M M/H M Serious H H/M M/H M L Moderate H/M M/H M L L Marginal M/H M L L L

Notes: H, highest priority; M, medium priority; L, lowest priority. Source: based on Greenfield and Camm 2005: 48. First published in Paoli et al. (2013). Copyright © 2005 by the RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA. Greenfield and Camm (2005). Adapted with permission.

- 10 Body-packing refers to the practice of ingesting drugs to conceal them during transport. Drug-containing balls that body-

packers ingest can break, leading to death or severe injury.

- 11 We describe the prioritizations as ‘preliminary’ because, to arrive at a more ‘final’ determination, one would also need to


evaluate the relative costs of implementing measures to address harms.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

harm is rare and the moderate harm is persistent, the moderate harm might, instead, merit more attention. That an interest dimension is more or less ‘basic’ does not affect the design or application of the matrix; rather, it affects the placement of harms in the matrix and the outcome of the analysis. Violations of functional integrity can engender more severe harms than violations of reputation, potentially placing them closer to the ‘top’ of the matrix, but, as in the comparison of grave and moderate harms, their relative ranking will still depend ultimately on their relative incidence. Moreover, the combination of our two scales can account for accumulative harms—that is, those harms that pose significant concern only if they are repeated. In the case of corruption, the occasional involvement of a low-level employee of a transportation company in cocaine trafficking might cause only marginal harm to the company’s mission. However, if numerous employees engage in corrupt acts, even if they are all low-level, the company’s operational integrity, reputation and perhaps also privacy might be endangered.

As should be apparent from our rating scales, we do not insist on quantifying all harms. When available, we use quantitative data to inform our evaluation, but our framework does not fundamentally require quantification. This flexibility buys us the freedom of employing alternative means of analysis; we do not, so to speak, leave any credible information on the table. Following von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991), the national security doctrine and other scholars in the drug policy community (e.g. Nutt et al. 2010), we acknowledge the limitations of expert judgment, but accept it as valid. Such acceptance can help to mitigate the bias of strict adherence to quantification, but, admittedly, it can also open the door to a different kind of bias, namely that of professional perspective. Different experts might—and often do—have different opinions. Therefore, we recommend triangulating expert opinion with observations from other sources.

Another advantage of our approach is that it allows comparisons of a fuller range of harms among individuals and, with some restrictions, within the classes of private-sector entities, government entities and the environment. However, although we can claim progress in addressing incommensurability, we cannot claim to have eliminated the challenge. Different types of harms to individuals can be held to a common standard, namely the ‘standard of living’, as can different types of harms to a private-sector entity or government entity vis-à-vis its ‘mission’, enabling withinclass comparisons, but damages to an individual’s standard of living and an entity’s mission capability are not readily comparable.12 As such, harms remain largely incommensurable across classes. Likewise, we cannot readily aggregate harms. We can tally the numbers of highest-, medium- and lowest-priority harms associated with each criminal activity and make inferences from the distributions, but we cannot state unequivocally whether a set of ten low-priority functional harms, five medium-priority material harms and one high-priority reputational harm is ‘better’ or ‘worse’ than a set of 12, four and two.

Nevertheless, our approach offers the benefit of making use of all available information, be it quantitative or qualitative, and, lacking need for large data sets or elaborate statistical methods, the potential advantage of speed. It demands rigorous thinking,

12 In this regard, we are no worse off than those attempting monetization and other forms of quantification in that we can still use quantitative information to make the same partial comparisons of harms that they can make. See Heaton (2010) for an overview of the cost-of-crime literature and Paoli and Greenfield (2013) for a critical discussion.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Table 4 Means of addressing elements of challenges

Challenge Approach Cultural and socio-economic variability and subjectivity

Taxonomy lists sources of ‘possible harms’

Infinitude Taxonomy claims to be encompassing, not exhaustive; accommodates harms of complex crimes that entail immediate, accompanying and enabled activities

Standardization Rating scales address ‘average’ individuals and typical entities, using common benchmarks, i.e. standard of living and ability to fulfil mission, respectively

Causality Taxonomy speaks of harms ‘associated with’ activity Quantification Rating scales exploit both quantitative and qualitative

data harvested during development of business model

Incommensurability Matrix, inclusive of underlying rating scales and benchmarks, enables limited comparisons of harms to bearers in same categories, e.g. among individuals

Notes: Framework also addresses causality in the assessment process, which concludes with an explicit two-part evaluation.

but, absent an extensive data collection, one can still exploit the facts on the ground to conduct a rapid, yet systematic, assessment.

In presenting three principle tools of our framework, namely the taxonomy, rating scales and matrix, we noted several ways in which it addresses the challenges of harm assessment. Table 4 provides a summary. Although some challenges cannot be overcome fully—for example, we cannot eliminate all the influences of the ‘dominant political morality’—we can address substantial elements of cultural and socio-economic variability, subjectivity, infinitude, causality, standardization, quantification and incommensurability.

The Harm Assessment Process

The harm assessment process consists of a series of steps that involves data collection, sorting and analysis (see Figure 1). We begin the process by constructing a business model, defined loosely as the modus operandi, for the criminal activity. In mafia-like cases of organized criminal activities, one might imagine an actual business model, whereas, in other circumstances, the notion of a true ‘business model’ would be too formal. Taking the approach developed by Sieber and Bögel (1993) and Huisman et al. (2003) in studies of organized crime in Germany and the Netherlands, respectively, the business model of a criminal activity consists of the depiction of the typical logistics of that activity. We use the business model to characterize the key operational phases of the activity and, for complex crimes, the functions and modes of ‘accompanying’ and ‘enabled’ activities. The business model provides essential building blocks of information.

After constructing the business model, we:

• identify the possible harms associated with criminal activities, such as cocaine trafficking, and the bearers of those harms; this step involves sorting harms by primary, accompanying and enabled activities and classifying harms according to type and bearer, using the taxonomy;

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- • evaluate the severity and incidence of harms; this step involves rating the severity and overall incidence of each harm, using the severity and incidence scales; the overall incidence accounts for both the incidence of each harm in relation to the criminal activity (what we refer to as the ‘within-activity’ incidence) and the incidence the criminal activity itself; a criminal activity might always produce serious harm but, if the activity occurs only very rarely, it might not merit concern;
- • prioritize harms, using the matrix of severity and incidence.


Lastly, we attempt to establish the causality of harms. Although we have not developed a specific tool for this step, we proceed in two stages: we account first for the ‘distance’ between a criminal activity and a harm and second for the extent to which the policy environment might give rise to the harm.

In the discussion that follows, we describe each step of the assessment process in terms of our application to cocaine trafficking in Belgium (Paoli et al. 2013). We conclude with comparative comments on our application of the framework to human trafficking, also in Belgium (Paoli et al. 2012), illustrating the different ways in which harms unfold under different circumstances. Both applications draw information from an extensive collection of primary data and secondary spanning a period of about seven years.

Construct business model

To start, we constructed a business model that identifies the typical phases of this activity: namely import and export or wholesale distribution (see Figure 2). For the import

# R.O.W.

(outside “egg”)

Export

Wholesale distribution

Dealing Use

Import

Sea, air, land

Money laundering, threat or use of violence,

# Belgium

Trafficking (wholesale)

corruption Dealing (retail)

(inside “egg”)

Fig. 2 The business model. Legend: ROW, rest of the world. First published in Paoli et al. (2013).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

phase, we also distinguished each of the major sea, air and land routes. We identified money laundering, the threat or use of violence and corruption as the three main ‘accompanying’ activities. Drug dealing and drug use compose the two main ‘enabled’ activities, but we did not assess drug use.

We found that the Port of Antwerp and Brussels International Airport dominate the trade as points of entry and that most of the cocaine that enters Belgium likely transits onward to other countries in Europe. On the basis of various estimates of consumption (e.g. Van Nuijs et al. 2009), seizures (e.g. Centrale Dienst Drugs 2010) and flows (e.g. US Department of State 2010: 143), we concluded that cocaine trafficking is a prominent criminal activity in Belgium and that imports more than amply cover domestic use: upwards of 30 tons of cocaine might flow into Belgium each year, amounting to perhaps as much as ten times the amount that Belgian users consume in the same time frame.

Identify possible harms

Given what we learned from the business model, we singled out harms that appeared to be plausible. Consistently with our stated goals of breadth and inclusivity and intending to leave as many normative decisions as possible to policy makers, we included the harms to perpetrators that are incurred in the conduct of a criminal act, except as noted previously vis-à-vis illegally obtained or inherently illegal possessions; for example, we included physical and psychological harms to body-packers, but did not include the material harms arising from the theft of cocaine shipments or weapons. We attributed particular harms to the activities in each phase, namely import and export or wholesale distribution, and classified them according to type and bearer on the basis of the taxonomy.

As a general proposition, we argued previously that harm to government reputation occurs whenever a law is broken and, consequently, the government appears to be ineffectual. In assessing importation, specifically, we found that:

- • harms to the physical and psychological integrity of individuals might arise either from cocaine trafficking via the air route, such as when body-packers overdose, or from the use or threat of violence along any route; in the latter case, traffickers, couriers, other facilitators and, more rarely, government officials or representatives might be victimized;
- • harms to the operational integrity, reputation and ‘privacy’ of government entities might arise if officials or representatives (e.g. law-enforcement or customs officers) engage in corrupt practices;
- • harms to the operational integrity, reputation and ‘privacy’ of transport and import-sector businesses might arise if corrupt officials, employees or traffickers misuse the assets of those businesses; reputational damage does not require internal collaboration; moreover, it can occur even if a business initially lacks any knowledge of misuse;
- • harms to the material interests of individuals, government entities or businesses might occur independently or arise in conjunction with harms to physical, psychological or operational integrity if the latter involve or require either medical treatment or the repair or replacement of material goods.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Evaluate severity and incidence

We then evaluated the severity and incidence of each of the ‘possible’ harms. Whereas we identified the set of possible harms on the basis of plausibility, in assessing incidence and severity, we confined ourselves to the evidence of realization found in criminal records, academic and grey literatures, and expert opinion. As such, a harm that we deemed ‘possible’ on the basis of the business model might not materialize in this evaluation with a rating.

We began the evaluation by estimating the incidence of the primary activity, namely cocaine trafficking. Recalling that 30 or more tons of cocaine might flow into Belgium annually and given data on the variability of shipment quantities (ranging from grams to tons) and the frequency of seizures, it seemed reasonable to conclude that smallscale operations occur at least daily, large-scale operations occur at least weekly and trafficking is a ‘persistent’ criminal activity.

Next, we conducted a detailed evaluation of the severity and ‘within-activity’ incidence of the harms of each primary, accompanying and enabled activity for the period under review, roughly 2003–09.

A summary of our evaluation of the functional harms to individuals that arise during the import of cocaine and the harms to the Belgian Government resulting from corruption illustrates the approach.

With regard to functional harms to individuals, we found evidence that the import of cocaine yields marginal to catastrophic harms to individuals in Belgium, but only rarely. To the extent that catastrophic harms arose during import, they did so only in the context of ‘body-packing’, a form of trafficking that can present harms to individuals’ physical and psychological integrity, including their dignity, and, in the extreme, can result in overdose and death. According to our sources, deaths occur exclusively in the context of air transit, which we describe as occurring ‘in Belgium’ for purposes of this analysis. We found evidence of two such deaths between 2003 and 2009. Our assessment is consistent with studies carried out in other countries, which find that cocaine body-packers rarely incur lethal or very serious complications (e.g. Bulstrode et al. 2002). Given the lack of Belgian statistics, we rely on those studies to conclude that body-packing may yield additional marginal to grave functional harms, also rarely (see Paoli et al. 2013).

Concerning harms to the Belgian Government from corruption, we found evidence linking three law-enforcement officers—a police officer, police trainee and customs officer—with either a criminal case or investigation of cocaine trafficking. According to the experts whom we interviewed in Antwerp and Brussels and foreign sources (e.g. US Department of State 2010: 143), no other cases of cocaine-related corruption have ever come to the fore. We found no evidence that the episodes yielded any substantial damage to the operational integrity, reputation or privacy of the Belgian police or customs. Thus, we regarded the ‘within-activity’ incidence of harms created by cocaine-related corruption to the operational integrity, reputation and privacy of the Belgian Government—or any of its subunits—as ‘rare’ and the severity as ‘marginal’.

In contrast, we assessed the severity of the general reputational harm to the Belgian Government from lawbreaking to be ‘marginal’, but regarded it as ‘always’ accompanying cocaine trafficking.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

For the most part, our assessment of the within-activity incidence of harms held fast as our evaluation of the overall incidence. In concept, we should ‘multiply’ the within-activity incidence by the incidence of the activity itself, to arrive at the overall incidence, but multiplying a within-activity incidence by ‘persistently’, which is the overall incidence of cocaine trafficking, usually does not result in a perceptible difference. The case of the general reputational harm to the Belgian Government presents a notable exception: because cocaine trafficking occurs just ‘persistently’ and not ‘always’, the overall incidence of the general reputational harm to the Belgian Government was not ‘always’, but ‘persistently’.

Establish policy priorities

Taken together, the ratings of incidence and severity provide a basis for preliminarily establishing policy priorities. For example, whereas corruption-derived reputational harms appeared to be a low priority for the Belgian Government, the general reputational harm, although marginal, was scored as a medium priority.

While our approach facilitates the systematic assessment of wide-ranging harms, it does not, as noted previously, fully enable the aggregation of harms within a particular class of bearers or direct comparisons of analogous harms across different classes of bearers. With regard to the former, a small set of low-priority harms for one bearer in one arena, such as the Belgian Government vis-à-vis cocaine trafficking, might be better or worse than an even smaller set of low-priority harms coupled with a mediumpriority harm for the same bearer in another arena, such as human trafficking. With regard to the latter, medium–high-priority functional harms to individuals, as occur in body-packing, might merit more or less concern than medium–high-priority functional harms to private-sector or government entities. Notwithstanding the caveats, we can still look at the broad sweep of ratings and draw insight from their distribution: for example, we find that the harms of cocaine trafficking most notably involve, but are not limited to, the individuals who are, themselves, traffickers.

Establish causality

This final step does not implement a specific ‘tool’, such as a model, taxonomy, scale or matrix; rather, it involves two distinct analytical stages.

First, we assess the ‘distance’ between the harms and the primary activity. The harms of enabled activities, for example, constitute remote harms, because they are not just spatially–temporally distant, but are mediated by the choices of other actors along the supply chain. In the case of cocaine trafficking in Belgium, the situation was clear-cut: only the rare and marginal harms that accrued from retail dealing were remote. All of the other harms were directly associated with cocaine trafficking, as it has transpired in Belgium. Von Hirsch and Jareborg (1991: 33–4) consider discounting for harms that occur only through the victims’ consent, explicitly mentioning the harms of drug use as a consequence of drug trafficking, but propose no formula for calculating the discount. A discount might be a useful response to varying ‘distance’, but, absent objective criteria for developing a formula, we choose to leave all such harms in play as we find them: determining which remote harms to include and with what weights constitutes a normative decision—one that we regard as outside our analytical domain.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Second, we examine the extent to which the harms associated with a criminal activity arise from the policy environment, including the prohibition of the criminal activity and related regulations and enforcement practices. We carry out this assessment on the basis of counterfactual reasoning—a common test of the validity of claims of causation in the social sciences and in historical studies (Calhoun 2002): namely, we consider what might have happened had the policy not been in place—for example, had cocaine trafficking not been prohibited. In the case of cocaine trafficking, we came to the conclusion that most or all of the harms associated with that activity, its accompanying activities (i.e. money laundering, violence and corruption) and retail dealing appeared to arise from the legal status of cocaine and from law-enforcement practices around that status. There would be little or no body-packing and less corruption and violence if cocaine could be legally imported into and traded in Belgium. MacCoun and Reuter (2001: 105–12) draw a similar conclusion in another context.

The purpose of this exercise is to assess the extent to which possible harms can be considered intrinsic to an activity. It also helps to single out the arenas in which policy makers might have the most leverage, insomuch as the harms accrue from their own policies. Unless germane to policy decisions, we do not attempt to establish the ultimate cause or causes of the primary activity.13

The relevance of establishing causality has been set forth in other bodies of literature, but from somewhat different perspectives. Much as MacCoun and Reuter (2001) and MacCoun et al. (1996) look to the primary sources of drug-related harms, Greenfield and Camm (2005: 47–8) conclude that establishing the ‘root’ cause of a bad consequence affecting a military mission or other national security operation is essential; otherwise, a policy maker might act inappropriately to address the consequences. In the case of criminal activities, establishing causality serves an additional and related purpose; that is, it enables one to assess the impact of the legal status of the activity. As noted by Maltz (1990: 41–8), an activity might cause harm, whether it is illegal or legal (e.g. Anielski and Braaten (2008: 81–99) in the case of gambling), while another activity might cause harm in part or whole because it is illegal (e.g. the harms deriving from the violence and corruption associated with cocaine trafficking). Moreover, one cannot weigh the pros and cons of different policy options without ascertaining causality.

After linking most or all of the harms of cocaine trafficking to the policy environment, we must, however, caution against over-interpretation. Without assessing the harms associated with cocaine use and establishing their causes, which we did not do in our analysis, we cannot say whether the balance of the harms resulting from cocaine, itself, and those produced by policy is positive or negative (see also MacCoun and Reuter 2001: 127).

Having used a specific activity, namely cocaine trafficking, to illustrate our approach, one might reasonably ask whether the approach would provide utility in other contexts and what differences we might see in those contexts. In response, we note that we have

13 In our application of the framework to four Belgian criminal activities, we regarded it as unnecessary to explore the causal link between criminal activities, their harms and specific characteristics of the broader socio-economic and environmental context. In other circumstances, the search for the causes of harms might need to account for that context and consider factors other than policy. For example, deforestation and other environmental damages associated with coca production vary, depending partly on land ownership patterns and terrain. Were we to assess the harms of coca production, socio-economic and environmental factors would need to enter into the assessment.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

also tested the framework thoroughly in the context of human trafficking and preliminarily in the contexts of VAT fraud and tobacco smuggling and counterfeiting. We found that the framework ‘holds up’ and, as one might expect, yields sharply different results in each case. In the case of human trafficking, we found that many of the harms were intrinsic, namely stemming from the activity, not policy, and that they accrued not to traffickers, but to their victims. In that case, we also found that it was the infrequency of the activity, per se, that resulted in largely low-level rankings, not the ‘within-activity’ incidence or severity of the harms. On that basis, we asked whether, in some instances, it might be necessary to emphasize the within-activity incidence of harms in policy choices; that is, if a government decided not to tolerate human trafficking in any volume, it might be more appropriate to apply rankings on the basis of the incidence of the harm in relation to the activity than on the basis of the overall incidence.

Potential Roles in Policy Analysis

In contemplating the value of future application of the framework, we have been able to identify at least five roles in policy analysis.14

First, if the assessment process is repeated for different kinds of criminal activities, taking existing statutes and policies for granted, the findings can be used to ‘compare’ the activities’ harmfulness and equip policy makers and law-enforcement agencies with evidence to establish strategic, long-term priorities. Given the incommensurability of harms across different classes of bearers and the difficulty of summing harms within classes, our framework cannot give an overall ranking of criminal activities, but it does allow for qualitative comparisons and rankings within each class of bearers, namely individuals, government entities, etc. For example, we can use our assessments of the harms of four different criminal activities in Belgium to compare the distributions of the different types of harms across the activities and, depending on the shapes of those distributions, make general inferences about the activities’ relative harmfulness.

Second, our framework can also help law-enforcement agencies decide which perpetrators, if any, merit special attention and thereby help them set their operational or tactical, short–medium-term priorities.15 The assessment process might, for example, reveal that certain types of perpetrators, distinguished by demographic traits, location, criminal affiliations or other characteristics, disproportionally engage in particularly harmful activities.

Third, our framework can be used to assess and compare the impact, including the unintended consequences and distributional effects, of different policy measures. The analysis, at least a well-structured thought exercise, must be repeated under different policy scenarios. In the case of our application, one might compare the harms associated with cocaine trafficking under the current prohibitionist regime with those under alternative regimes. More generally, the framework could inform the assessment of whether specific activities warrant criminal status, given the harms associated with them. From

- 14 In contemplating other possible uses of the framework, we note that our framework is not just ‘evidence-based’, but to some extent it is also ‘evidence-dependent’. Among other things, this means that the framework might be less relevant in contexts in which information gleaned from past events, including case histories and court records, has little or no predictive power. One obvious example is that of a cataclysmic terrorist episode.
- 15 For the distinction between strategic and operational priorities of law-enforcement agencies, see Osborne and Wernicke (2003: 7).


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

this empirical perspective, some activities that have been deemed ‘criminal’ might not seem to warrant that status and other activities that are regulated by administrative or civil law might (see von Hirsch et al. 2005: 187). Ashworth (2006: 53–4, 46–7) stresses the need for empiricism, particularly in relation to so-called ‘regulatory’ offences (e.g. failure to comply with requirements to file documents with official agencies) that involve only minor harm. Ashworth (2006) and others also point out that various instances of corporate lawbreaking, such as those involving pollution and safety, might merit full criminalization and substantial sentences, given the considerable damages they involve. On that basis, the harm assessment could be carried out not only ex post, but also ex ante, to better understand the implications of introducing new policy measures or offences. If the framework is expanded to account for the benefits of activities (‘full accounting’), it could be applied to any repeated activity that, even if legitimate, is suspected of generating harms in addition to (economic) benefits (e.g. tobacco production and trade).

Fourth, the framework, particularly the severity scale, can provide an empirical benchmark for reviewing existing sentences and sentencing guidelines and, if desired, establishing new guidelines that are more proportionate to the underlying harms of offences. Similarly, it could be used to consider the standardization of jury awards (see also Sunstein 2008). These decisions are inherently normative but they would be stronger if they were informed by an empirical assessment of the harms associated with specific crimes in a specific socio-political context. Von Hirsch et al. (2005: 218, 186–7) regard such empirical research as ‘profitable’, noting that both the jurisprudence of crime seriousness and the related legal doctrine have so far remained underdeveloped.

Fifth, by considering harms to a variety of collective bearers and the environment in addition to individuals, the approach here proposed could provide the conceptual framework and empirical evidence to expand restorative justice programmes beyond their current focus on interpersonal crimes.

Concluding Remarks

As Ashworth (2006: 39) notes, ‘the task of assessing the seriousness of the offence is … as complex and problematic as it is unavoidable and fundamental’. In providing a means of identifying, evaluating and, with some restrictions, comparing harms across criminal activities, our framework represents a potentially important advancement for evidence-informed policy making. It extends von Hirsch and Jareborg’s approach by considering other bearers, in addition to individuals, and its application constitutes the first empirical test of their ‘pathbreaking’ (Ashworth 2006: 37) model. Unlike this and other taxonomic predecessors (e.g. MacCoun et al. 1996; Newcombe 1992), our framework has the advantage of being applicable to many different forms of crime, including those complex crimes wherein harms do not derive from a single actor or activity. Moreover, instead of focusing only on harms that can be quantified, the framework offers a basis for systematically harvesting available information, whether quantitative or qualitative, including expert opinion, and at the same time it avoids giving ‘a misleading sense of precision’ (von Hirsch and Jareborg 1991: 28).

Sen (1987) asked why must we reject being vaguely correct in favour of being precisely wrong? In that spirit (see also Nutt 2011; Room 2011), it is our hope that this framework will promote the cause of ‘vague correctness’ as an analytically preferable alternative to ‘precise wrongness’.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

The conceptual and technical challenges of the exercise remain daunting, but we have acknowledged them explicitly and, in so doing, we have been better able to identify methods of addressing them and, whenever relevant, to spell out the limitations of those methods. Realizing the problems of quantification, for example, we propose a qualitative alternative—a choice that also raises the possibilities of rapid assessments and cross-country comparisons. Facing the dilemma of incommensurability, we propose ‘benchmarking’ as a basis for making comparisons of harms to particular classes of bearers, but recognize that it is still not possible to compare harms across classes. Along similar lines, we are open in acknowledging the normative dimensions of the process.

Despite the remaining challenges, the harm framework provides the tools and delineates the steps necessary to reliably assess harms of criminal activities and begin research in this crucial but still neglected area of study. If ‘harm’ is to play a larger part in policy making, it is time for criminologists and other social scientists to flesh out and apply methods to support that process.

Funding

This paper derives from a larger project on organized crime in Belgium, entitled “Danger: Appraising the Dangerousness of Organised Crime” and funded by the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office.

References

Anielski, M. and Braaten, A. (2008),The Socio-Economic Impact of Gambling (SEIG) Framework:

An Assessment Framework for Canada: In Search of the Gold Standard. Ashworth, A. (2006), Principles of Criminal Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bulstrode, N., Banks, F. and Shrotria, S. (2002), ‘The Outcome of Drug Smuggling by “Body-

Packers”: The British Experience’, Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, 84: 358. Calhoun, C. (2002), Counterfactual Reasoning, in C. Calhoun, ed., Dictionary of the Social Sciences, 98. New York: Oxford University Press. Caulkins, J. P. and Reuter, P. (1997), ‘Settings Goals for Drug Policy: Harm Reduction or Use Reduction?’, Addiction, 92: 1143–50.

Caulkins, J. P., Reuter, P. and Coulson, C. (2011), ‘Basing Drug Scheduling Decisions on Scientific Ranking of Harmfulness: False Promise from False Premises’,Addiction, 106: 1886–90.

Centrale Dienst Drugs, Federale Politie België (Central Service Drugs, Belgian Federal Police) (2010), ‘Statistieken inbeslagnames cocaïne België’, (‘Statistics on cocaine seizures in Belgium’) unpublished memo.

Cohen, M. A. (2005), The Costs of Crime and Justice. London: Routledge. Council of the European Union (2002), ‘Council Decision of 28 February 2002 Setting Up

Eurojust with a View to Reinforcing the Fight against Serious Crime (2002/187/JHA)’, Official Journal of the European Communities, L 63: 1–13.

- —— (2009), ‘Council Decision of 6 April 2009 Establishing the European Police Office (Europol) (2009/371/JHA)’, Official Journal of the European Union, 15.5.2009L 121: 37–66.


Dorn, N. (2009), ‘The End of Organised Crime in the European Union’, Crime Law and Social Change, 51: 283–95.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Dorn, N. and van de Bunt, H. (2010), Bad Thoughts: Towards an Organised Crime Harm

Assessment and Prioritisation System. Rotterdam: Erasmus University. Fattah, E. A., ed. (1992), Towards a Critical Victimology. New York: St Martin’s Press. Feinberg, J. (1984), Harm to Others. New York: Oxford University Press. Gray, D. (2010), ‘Punishment as Suffering’, Vanderbilt Law Review, 63: 1619–93. Greenfield, V. A. and Camm, F. (2005), Risk Management and Performance in the Balkans

Support Contract. Santa Monica: Rand.

Greenfield, V. A. and Paoli, L. (2012), ‘If Supply-Oriented Drug Policy Is Broken, Can Harm Reduction Help Fix It? Melding Disciplines and Methods to Advance International Drug Control Policy’, International Journal of Drug Policy, 23: 6–15.

Heaton, P. (2010), Hidden in Plain Sight. What Cost-of-Crime Research Can Tell Us about Investing in Police. Rand Occasional Paper. Online available at: http://www.rand.org/ pubs/occasional_papers/OP279.html.

Hillyard, P. and Tombs, S. (2004), ‘Beyond Criminology?’, in P. Hillyard, C. Pantazis, S. Tombs and D. Gordon, eds, Beyond Criminology: Taking Harm Seriously, 10–29. London: Pluto Press. Home Office (2011), The National Crime Agency: A Plan for the Creation of a National Crime-Fighting Capability. Home Office, UK, available online at www.homeoffice.gov.uk/publications/ crime/nca-creation-plan?view=Binary.

Huisman, W., Huikeshoven, M., van de Bunt, H. G., van Wijk, J. and Meijer, A. D.

(2003), De Zwakste Schakel: Logistieke processen van georganiseerde criminaliteit. (The weakest link: Logistical processes of organized crime) Amsterdam: Vrije Universiteit.

Jackson, B. A., Dixon, L. and Greenfield, V.A. (2007), Economically Targeted Terrorism: A Review of the Literature and a Framework for Considering Defensive Approaches, TR-476-CTRMP, Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Kopp, P. and Besson, F. (2009), ‘A Methodology to Measure the Impact of Organised Crime Activities at the EU Level’, in E. Savona, ed., Organised Crime in the EU, 301–20. Rotterdam: Erasmus University School of Law.

Levi, M. and Burrows, J. (2008), ‘Measuring the Impact of Fraud in the UK’, British Journal of Criminology, 48: 293–318. MacCormick, N. (1982), Legal Rights and Social Democracy: Essays in Legal and Political Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon. MacCoun, R. J. and Reuter, P. (2001), Drug War Heresies: Learning From Other Vices, Times, and Places. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. MacCoun, R. J., Reuter, P. and Schelling, T. (1996), ‘Assessing Alternative Drug Control Regimes’, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 15: 1–23.

MacDonald, Z., Tinsley, L., Collingwood, J., Jamieson, P. and Pudney, S. (2005), Measuring the Harm from Illegal Drugs Using the Drug Harm Index, Home Office Online Report 24/05. London: Home Office.

Maltz, M. D. (1990), Measuring the Effectiveness of Organized Crime Control Efforts. Chicago: Office of International Criminal Justice.

Newcombe, R. (1992), ‘The Reduction of Drug-Related Harm: A Conceptual Framework for Theory, Practice, and Research’, in P. O’Hare, R. Newcombe, A. Matthews, E. C. Buning and E. Drucker, eds, The Reduction of Drug-Related Harm, 1–14. London: Routledge. Nutt, D. J. (2011), ‘Let Not the Best Be the Enemy of the Good’, Addiction, 106: 1892–3. Nutt, D. J., King, L. A. and Philips, L. D. (2010), ‘Drug Harms in the UK: A Multicriteria

Decision Analysis’, Lancet, 376: 1558–65.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Osborne, D. and Wernicke, S. (2003), Introduction to Crime Analysis: Basic Resources for Criminal Justice Practice. New York: Haworth Press Paoli, L. and Greenfield, V. A. (2013), ‘Harm: A Neglected Concept in Criminology, a Necessary Benchmark for Crime-Control Policy’, submitted for publication.

Paoli, L., Greenfield, V. A. and Zoutendijk, A. (2013), ‘The Harm of Cocaine Trafficking: Applying a New Framework for Assessment’, Journal of Drug Issues doi:10.1177/0022042613475614. Published online on February 20, 2013

Paoli, L., Zoutendijk, A. and Greenfield, V. A. (2012), ‘De schade van georganiseerde criminaliteit’, (The harm of organised crime) in T. Vander Beken, L. Paoli, A. Zoutendijk and N. Klima, eds, Het inschatten van de gevaarlijkheid van georganiseerde criminaliteit, (Assessing the danger of organized crime) 19–84. Gent: Academia Press.

Room, R. (2011), ‘Scales and Blinkers, Motes and Beams: Whose View is Obstructed on Drug Scheduling?’, Addiction, 106: 1895–6. Ryberg, J. (2004), The Ethics of Proportionate Punishment: A Critical Investigation. Dordrecht: Kluwer International Publishers.

Sen, A. (1987), ‘The Standard of Living: Lecture I, Concepts and Critiques and The Standard of Living: Lecture II, Lives and Capabilities’, in G. Hawthorn, ed., The Standard of Living—The Tanner Lectures, Clare Hall, Cambridge, 1985, 1–19, 20–38. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) (2008), The United Kingdom Threat Assessment of Serious Organised Crime 2008/9 [London: SOCA.].

- —— (2010), Annual Plan 2010/2011 Online available at: http://www.soca.gov.uk/search?q= soca+annual+plan+2010&Submit=Go&option=com_googlemini.


Sieber, U. and Bögel, M. (1993), Die Logisik organisierter Kriminalität. (The logistics of

organized crime) Wiesbaden: Bundeskriminalamt. Spalek, B. (2006), Crime Victims: Theory, Policy and Practice. Basingstoke: Macmillan. Sparrow, M. (2008), The Character of Harms: Operational Challenges in Control. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press. Sunstein, C. (2008), ‘Legal Implications of the New Research on Happiness’, Journal of Legal Studies, 37: 157–94. Tusikov, N. (2012), ‘Measuring Organised Crime-Related Harms: Exploring Five Policing Methods’, Crime, Law and Social Change, 57: 99–115. US Department of State (2010), 2010 International Narcotics Control Strategy Report, available online at www.state.gov/documents/organization/137411.pdf.

Van Nuijs, A., Pecceu, B., Theunis, L., Dubois, N., Charlier, C., Jorens, P., Bervoets, L., Blust, R., Neels, H. and Covaci, A. (2009), ‘Cocaine and Metabolites in Waste and Surface Water across Belgium’, Environmental Pollution, 157: 123–9.

Vander Beken, T., Paoli, L., Zoutendijk, A. and Klima, N. (2012), Het inschatten van de gevaarlijkheid van georganiseerde criminaliteit. (Assessing the danger of organized crime) Gent: Academia Press.

Von Hirsch, A. and Jareborg, N. (1991), ‘Gauging Criminal Harms: A Living Standard Analysis’, Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 11: 1–38.

Von Hirsch, A., Ashworth, A. and Jareborg, N. (2005), Gauging Crime Seriousness: A ‘Living Standard’ Conception of Criminal Harm: Appendix 3 of Proportionate Sentencing, 186–

219. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Walklate, S., ed. (2007), Handbook of Victims and Victimology. Cullompton: Willan.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjc/article/53/5/864/336249 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

