THIS IS A PRE- COPY EDITED VERSION OF THE CHAPTER PUBLISHED  IN M. MAGUIRE, R, MORGAN AND R.REINER (eds) OXFORD  HANDBOOK OF CRIMINOLOGY (4th edition OUP 2007).  AN UPDATED  CHAPTER CAN BE FOUND IN THE 5th EITION (2012) 

Crime Data and Criminal Statistics  

Mike Maguire  

‘Let me be quite clear about this.  Statistics is not tables or numbers, sets of  techniques, lists of formulae, but is an approach to understanding the world  about us.  However, that world is very complex and there is no quick and  easy way of gaining such understanding…  If everything appears simple  and crystal clear probably you have misunderstood the issue you are  considering.’       (W.M. Harper. Statistics.)  

INTRODUCTION   

This chapter explores a number of interrelated questions about 'crime levels', ‘crime patterns’ and  'crime trends' and how they are measured.  These range from what may sound like (but are not)  straightforward empirical and methodological questions, such as 'how much crime is there?', 'how  is it changing?' and 'how do we know?', to more sociological and political questions about the  relationships between, on the one hand, the kinds of crime data which are collected and published  and, on the other, changing perceptions of the nature of ‘the crime problem’ and developments in  criminal justice policy and the politics of crime control.  The chapter is divided into four main  sections.  Two of these (the first and the fourth) relate mainly to the latter kinds of questions, while  the second and third discuss the main sources of data that are available and the various pictures of  crime that they portray.       

The first section provides a broad historical overview of changing approaches to the ‘measurement’  of crime in England and Wales.  Here it is argued that, from Victorian times until the 1970s, the  field was dominated by what came to be known as the ‘official statistics’, a series of annual  compilations by the Home Office of offences recorded by the police, whose broad efficacy as a  national ‘barometer’ of crime was rarely challenged.  However, since then, crime has risen up the  political agenda and a whole new industry has developed around the goal of reducing and  ‘managing’ it, both at local and national (and, increasingly, international) level.   Greater attention  has also been paid to relatively ‘hidden’ forms of crime that take place in the privacy of the home  or the workplace, as well as to new kinds of cross-border and internet crime, none of which are  adequately reflected in the official statistics.  These changes have fuelled an explosive growth in  the collection, analysis and publication of crime data from many new sources, in which a much  greater plurality of organisations and individuals has become involved.  At the same time, the value  of the recorded crime figures has been increasingly questioned.  They are widely regarded as ‘unfit  for purpose’ in terms of new data needs, and the general picture they paint of the scale and  changing contours of the ‘crime problem’ has been challenged as seriously misleading.  The Home  Office has responded to some of these criticisms and demands, not only by developing several  major new sources of crime data of its own (mainly through large scale surveys), but also by the  fairly radical step of publishing the annual recorded crime figures alongside results from the British 

Crime Survey (Walker et al. 2006).  This has in effect elevated the latter to the status of a second  set of ‘official statistics’. 

The second section looks more closely at what these two principal ‘official’ sources of data appear  to tell us about the overall scale of crime and trends over time, and examines their main problems  and limitations in this respect.  Comparisons are also made between the two, especially in relation  to areas in which they have appeared to give contradictory messages.  A key message throughout is  that this is an area of shifting sands, and that any assertion about crime numbers or trends should be  based on a thorough understanding of how the figures were produced.    

The third section looks at pictures of crime which have emerged from alternative sources of data,  beginning with the challenge that was mounted in the 1980s to both police and BCS figures by  local crime surveys in inner city areas.  Brief accounts are also given of recent developments in  (and problems of) data gathering in relation to types of crime that are especially difficult to ‘count’  and/or do not often come to police notice.  These include domestic violence, child abuse, crimes  within closed institutions, crimes against business, corporate fraud, cross-border and organised  crime, and crimes by governments.  Finally, attention is drawn to the recent rekindling of interest in  data on offenders (as opposed to offences), particularly through a revival of self-report studies.     

The fourth section returns to questions about the relationship between crime data and developments  in the policy and political realms.  Recent significant changes in the Home Office approach to the  collection and presentation of crime data, it is argued, have taken place mainly in response to new  data demands from policy-makers and practitioners.  These demands are driven both by new  operational needs (to support local and national crime reduction initiatives, ‘evidence based  policy’, partnership working, and so on) and by the strong government focus on performance  management of the police and criminal justice agencies.  They have been addressed, on the one  hand, by gathering and disseminating more comprehensive information about crime; and on the  other, by introducing more checks on the integrity of crime recording (such as the National Crime  Recording Standard).  While welcome to policy-makers, these developments have had the  unintended consequences of confusing the public and politicians about trends in crime, and  contributing to a general decline in trust in government statistics.  These issues will be discussed in  the light of a new Statistic Commission review, which concludes that the governance of ‘official  statistics’ should be placed into independent hands.   

Two general points should be noted before beginning.  First, most of the ‘official’ data and  statistics discussed refer to England and Wales: these are complicated enough, and to attempt to  delve into the similar data elsewhere would have been over-ambitious.  Nevertheless, an  international literature is referred to, and many of the points made have general application.   Secondly, the terms ‘data’ and ‘statistics’ tend to be used very loosely in the field of criminology,  as well as by government departments.  Strictly speaking, the simple frequency tables that are often  published under the name of ‘criminal statistics’ are not ‘statistics’ in the sense understood by  mathematicians (which implies analysis and interpretation).  However, we shall not break ranks,  and will use the term as it is used in everyday language, to describe any set of data analysed or  presented in a systematic fashion.  Similarly, the term ‘data’ will be used very broadly to refer to  any kind of information collected in a quantifiable form. 

HISTORICAL OVERVIEW: THE RISE AND FALL OF OFFICIAL STATISTICS 

The idea of ‘measuring’ crime in a systematic way – for example, attempting to count the numbers  of offences committed, or to determine where and when they most often occur - first came to  prominence in France in the early 19th century, where it was promoted by the so-called ‘moral  statisticians’, Quetelet and Guerry, as part of a scientific vision of discovering laws and regularities  in the social world akin to those that had been identified in the natural world (see, for example,  Beirne 1993).  However, the idea was also highly compatible with the aims and practices of the  centralised bureaucracies that were expanding across Europe in support of the emerging nation  states.  As theorists such as Foucault (1977) have argued, the compilation of detailed information  about many aspects of social life was a crucial factor in the development of modernity, and closely  tied up with the consolidation of governments’ control over their populations.  It was unsurprising,  therefore, that the collection and analysis of crime data soon became predominantly the province of  government employees, rather than academic scientists.     

Of course, there are many different kinds of crime-related information that can be collected by or  on behalf of governments, and it can be used for a variety of purposes (benign or otherwise), which  may also change over time.  At one extreme, detailed information about individuals can be gathered  and stored in centralised file systems and databases.  This usually has more to do with direct  surveillance and control than with ‘measurement’: for example, at around the same time as Quetelet  and Guerry were writing, Eugene-Francois Vidocq, the first head of the Paris Surete, was operating  on behalf of the French government the most sophisticated system of surveillance yet devised,  using an innovative card index system of intelligence files on hundreds of people designated as  criminals or enemies of the state (Morton 2005).1  At the other extreme, the information collected  may consist of regular anonymised statistical returns from local courts or police forces, which have  little immediate operational value, but may have a number of broader functions (as discussed  below).  In between are many other kinds of data collected on a one-off basis to inform policy or  practice at national or local level, including the results of inquiries or research into specific types of  crime.      

In England and Wales, particular value came to be attached from the middle of the 19th century  onwards to regular statistical series based on data sent to the Home Office from every local area.   The first set of these national crime statistics was compiled in 1857, and similar tables continued to  be published annually in government Command Papers – latterly under the title Criminal Statistics,  England and Wales – for nearly 150 years.  Widely known as the ‘official statistics’, the tables  were based on annual returns from the police and the courts which were checked and aggregated by  government statisticians.  Although the terminology and coverage changed in minor ways over  time, the basic format remained remarkably similar for many years.  The publication was divided  into two main sections, one covering offences recorded by the police and the other ‘offenders  cautioned or found guilty’.  Most of the tables on recorded crime (the main object of our interest  here) consisted of counts of specific types of offence, classified by legal categories and broken  down by, for example, police force area.  They also showed trends in the various totals over both  the long and short term.   The offender-based tables were mainly concerned with the types and  lengths of sentence given for different categories of offence, broken down variously by age, sex  and area.  Innovation in presentation or analysis was rare, as the statisticians (who over time  became to some extent distanced from the policy-making world) were driven more by the aim of  producing consistent statistical series rather than that of producing data or analysis geared to  immediate practical needs. 

The production of annual criminal statistics of these kinds has a number of potential purposes and  uses, the prominence and value of which can change considerably over time.  Their introduction in  England and Wales initially provided an important new window for central administrators on to  what was going on in different areas of the country, and the statistics were increasingly used to  assist them in allocating resources and monitoring court and police activities (including, for  example, sentencing trends and police detection rates).  At a more abstract level, they came to be  seen as providing something akin to an official barometer of the ‘moral health of the nation’,  paralleling the use of mortality statistics to assess its physical health.  To some extent, too, they  were taken as a measure of the success or failure of government policies in protecting the public  from crime.  However, until the 1960s official crime rates generally remained low and there were  few rapid upward trends or dramatic year-on-year increases to generate serious concern.  There was  also something of a tacit agreement among politicians that the power of governments to influence  crime rates over the short term is limited, and it was not until much later that crime began to be  regarded as a major issue in general elections.  Thus while the publication of the annual volume of  Criminal Statistics usually attracted some political debate and media attention, this was usually  fairly muted and short-lived.  Again, although (a) the police, as sole providers of crime data and (b)  the Home Office, as the agency which specified the form in which they should be recorded and  presented, occupied what was almost a duopolistic position in terms of determining how the shape  and scale of the ‘crime problem’ was portrayed to the country, surprisingly few challenges were  mounted against the validity of the data or the ‘truth’ of the overall picture they painted.   

In terms of crime data other than the regular statistical returns from criminal justice agencies, the  cupboard remained fairly bare – or, at least, stocked with a very limited range of products - for  many years.  In line with the predominant emphasis in crime prevention policy then accorded to the  rehabilitation of offenders, most of the more detailed studies and inquiries carried out or  commissioned by government in the early and mid twentieth century focused upon analysis of the  backgrounds and characteristics of imprisoned offenders.  By contrast, little attention was paid to  the physical circumstances or geographical distribution of offences.  This applied not just to policymakers, but to academic criminologists, who were small in number and came mainly from  psychological or psychiatric backgrounds.  Few looked beyond samples of offenders identified  through police and criminal justice processes, and field-based studies of how and where particular  kinds of crime were committed were rare.  Broadly speaking, then, until well into the second half of  the 20th century, the collection, analysis and presentation of data about crime was based on limited  sources and carried out mainly in a mechanical fashion within a narrow frame of reference.  It had a  fairly low public profile and was largely left to government statisticians, occasionally assisted by  academics who rarely looked beyond the official figures or questioned the assumptions behind their  production.   

However, since the early 1970s significant changes have taken place.  Crime has become a major  focus of public concern and a critical issue in party politics (Downes and Morgan, this volume).    Governments have increasingly set out to ‘manage’ crime problems, and the crime prevention and  control industry, in the broadest sense of the term, has expanded rapidly.  Rather than relying solely  on traditional criminal justice responses such as deterrent sentences or rehabilitative interventions,  this has involved efforts to manipulate the environment in order to reduce opportunities for  offending, as well as the encouragement of proactive and problem-oriented forms of policing  (Maguire 2000; Bullock and Tilley 2003).  In addition, concerns have extended beyond the  ‘conventional’ forms of crime (such as theft, vandalism and burglary) which make up the bulk of  recorded offences, to many kinds of criminal behaviour (such as domestic violence and child sexual  abuse) that previously remained largely hidden from official view, as well as to the growth of new  and more organised forms of crime with international dimensions (such as computer fraud, people 

trafficking, and money laundering) made possible by rapid technological change and globalisation  (Loader and Sparks, Levi, this volume).  Such changes have created a need for new kinds of  information about crime at local, national and international level, including detailed analysis of  patterns in particular types of offence that can directly inform policy-making and operational  practice, and data that can be processed and disseminated much more quickly than in the past.            

In response, the numbers of people engaged in data collection and research, and the sources of  information available to them, have increased dramatically and numerous new fields of inquiry  have been opened up, producing a veritable ‘data explosion’ in the field.  This has been evident in  the Home Office itself, whose research unit (now called Research Development and Statistics  Directorate, or ‘RDS’) has grown much larger than that of any other government department, and  has played a significant part in the development of new ways of measuring crime (notably the  British Crime Survey).  At the same time, criminology in universities has grown from a minor  subject taught only as part of other degrees, to a flourishing specialist discipline employing several  hundred academics, many of them engaged in empirical research.  Many other organisations in the  public, private and voluntary sectors also now employ their own researchers to analyse agency  records or conduct surveys to produce new data (at national, regional or local level) about specific  types of crime.  In essence, we have moved from a situation in which there was only one ‘official  picture’ of crime, to one in which (a) the Home Office’s own official statistics are now based on  more than one kind of data (as will be discussed towards the end of the chapter, the Command  Paper Criminal Statistics has been replaced by a series of statistical bulletins, headed by an annual  publication in which crime survey and police figures are presented jointly – see Walker et al.  2006); and (b) data from many other respected (and less well respected) organisations provide a  kaleidoscope of different, overlapping, and in some cases competing, pictures.  Parallel changes  have been occurring in many other countries, encouraging a growth of comparative information, as  well as a search for more reliable information about the nature and scale of cross-border crime.       

To illustrate the scale of these changes, a brief comparison of the current situation with the 1970s  shows that important new sources of knowledge have been developed in all the following areas.   They will be discussed in more detail later in the chapter.  

1.  Unreported and unrecorded offences.   Before the 1980s, very little data had been systematically  collected in England and Wales on offences not reported to, or recorded by, the police.  The first  British Crime Survey was not carried out until 1982 (Hough and Mayhew 1983).  It has now  become an annual survey of over 40,000 people, and has been complemented by a variety of local  surveys, as well as special surveys of under-reported offences such as those against businesses  (Shury et al. 2005).  In addition, the possibility has been explored of measuring some crime trends  through data from agencies outside the criminal justice system (for example, tracking violence via  records of assault victims attending Accident and Emergency departments: see Shepherd et al.  2000; Simmons 2000: 31-2; Estrada 2006).   

2.  Locations and circumstances of offences.   Much more detailed information is now collected (in  the BCS, from police records and elsewhere) on, for example, where, when and how offences take  place, how far offenders travel to offend, and what kinds of loss or damage victims suffer.  The  spatial aspects of this kind of information have attracted particular attention, which has led to the  growth of a flourishing new branch of the subject, usually referred to as ‘environmental  criminology’ (see Bottoms, this volume), and to the development of new ways of analysing and  representing relevant data.  These include ‘mapping’ based on the geo-coding of offences by the  police, mainly through the use of postcodes, which allows visual representations to be made of  crime ‘hot-spots (Read and Oldfield 1995; Hirschfield and Bowers 1998) 

3.  Specificity.  Criminologists have become much more aware of the diversity of criminal  behaviour.  Rather than perceiving and analysing ‘crime’ in terms of a few broad legal categories,  they now tend to focus on highly specific forms of behaviour (the variety of which, moreover,  grows as offenders devise new ways of stealing property, or as the police or media discover a new  ‘crime threat’).  For example, it would be unusual nowadays to find an analysis of ‘robbery’:  researchers are more likely to examine a more specific problem such as ‘street robbery’ (as  opposed to, say, bank or building society robbery, or security van robbery), or even something as  narrow as the forcible theft of mobile phones (Harrington and Mayhew 2001).   

4.   Hidden types of crime.    More and more kinds of 'private' criminal activity which formerly lay  largely hidden from public view - and which remain even now greatly under-represented in  recorded crime figures - have not only become familiar subjects in television programmes and  newspaper articles, but have been studied in systematic fashion.  Prominent among these are some  intra-household offences such as domestic violence and child sex abuse; 'white collar' and corporate  offences; and crimes involving consenting parties – sometimes called ‘victimless’ or ‘consensual’  crimes - such as supplying or possessing drugs.

5.  Victim perspectives and public opinion.   Much more information is also now available – mainly  from crime surveys, interview studies, and analysis of police incident records - about crime from  the perspective of the victim or potential victim.  This includes detailed knowledge about the  emotional and financial impact of different kinds of offence (Shapland et al 1985; Maguire and  Corbett 1987); calculations of the relative risks among different social groups of falling victim to  particular kinds of crime (see Hoyle and Zedner, this volume); public and victim attitudes towards  offenders and the criminal justice system (Mattinson and Mirrlees-Black 2000;  Roberts and Hough  2002); ratings of the seriousness of different types of crime (Pease 1988); and regular measures of  ‘fear of crime’ (Farrall et al. 1997; Semmens 2001). 

6.  Comparative and cross-national data.  There has been a considerable investment since the mid1990s in international surveys of both victimisation and offending.  These ask similar questions to  samples of residents from several countries and the results are analysed singly and together  (Graham and Bowling 1995; Van Kesteren et al. 2000).  Some attempts have also been made to  explore the nature and scale of organised cross-border crime, but these are relatively  underdeveloped as yet.   

Of course, the collection, storage and analysis of data has been greatly encouraged and facilitated  by the development of information technology.  There are now several massive electronic data sets  in existence, including the results of large-scale victim surveys (notably the British Crime Survey)  and national databases of offenders (eg the Offenders Index, the Police National Computer, and  latterly the e-OASys database, which will eventually contain detailed risk-needs assessments of  virtually all convicted offenders in England and Wales.  To these can be added national databases  of specific types of offence (eg the Homicide Index, and ‘Catchem’)2 and a host of local record  systems maintained by the police, courts, prisons, probation and other statutory and voluntary  agencies.  Other large data sets - many of them accessible for secondary analysis through the ESRC  data archive at Essex University - have been produced by major funded research projects, including  longitudinal ‘cohort’ studies, local crime surveys and self-report surveys.  There have also been  significant advances in the analytical tools available, such as computer packages for multivariate  analysis and statistical modelling (Hair et al 1998).  

However, as already intimated, in trying to make sense of this ‘data explosion’, it is important to  look not just at advances in technology, but at changes in ways of thinking about and responding to  crime.  These stand in a dynamic relationship with the production of crime data, both driving  demands for new kinds of information and in turn being influenced by the new knowledge they  generate.  The following can be identified as key factors which have contributed to this process  over the last 30 years. 

Academic critiques of recorded crime statistics 

Although many academic criminologists in the 1970s were (deliberately) remote from government  policy-making circles, the fertile developments in academic theory and research during this period  had a considerable indirect influence over the longer term on how crime is measured.  The socalled ‘deviancy theorists’ who pioneered a sea change in the previously narrow discipline of  criminology, were strongly influenced by the American ‘labelling’ perspective and its emphasis on  the role of legal, institutional and social processes in ‘creating’ crime (see Rock, this volume).   Police and court records, they argued, are not the product of a neutral fact-collecting process, but of  activities geared first and foremost to organisational aims and needs.  Thus the statistics that are  derived from them tell us more about the organisation than about the ‘real’ extent of crime (a  concept which anyway has no useful meaning): in the words of Kitsuse and Cicourel (1963), they  are simply 'indices of organisational processes'.  This 'institutionalist', as opposed to 'realist',  approach was broadly the starting position adopted by Bottomley and Coleman (1981) in an  important study of crime recording processes in police stations which revealed the importance of  police practices and attitudes in shaping the official statistics.  While some criminologists took  these ideas in directions that most policy-makers found unconvincing - including arguments that all  rises in crime were illusory and in some cases deliberately manufactured by the police, government  and/or media (eg Hall et al. 1978) – the basic message that changes in recorded crime figures did  not necessarily reflect changes in criminal behaviour, began to be widely accepted.  

In addition to their sustained critique of official crime figures, the deviancy theorists and their  immediate successors left an important legacy in terms of opening up research into types of  criminal behaviour that had hitherto remained largely hidden from official view.  To do so, they  broke away from the use of institutionally produced data, preferring to generate their own by means  of qualitative methods such as participant observation, interviews based on ‘snowball’ samples  (rather than samples of, say, convicted offenders), analysis of newspaper stories, and so on.  In  doing so, they tapped rich new sources of knowledge and produced revealing new insights into  activities about which little was known and which rarely in those days appeared in police records,  such as drug-taking, workplace 'fiddles' and business fraud (examples being, respectively, Young  1971; Ditton 1977; Levi 1981).  It should be noted that some of these behaviours, though readily  understood as types of illegal activity, could not easily be mapped on to specific offence categories  that appear in criminal statistics.  It was partly to get away from the traditional focus on legallydefined categories of behaviour as the main objects of research, and encourage instead a focus on  socially defined categories of unacceptable behaviour, that some academics chose to name their  field of study as ‘deviance’ rather than ‘crime’ (see Downes and Rock 2003).    

It is emphasized that most of these writers contributed little in terms of developing of new sources  of statistical data about crime, nor were they interested in measuring the frequency of particular  kinds of incident.  On the contrary, they were largely responsible for a period in British  criminology when the climate in the discipline was generally anti-statistical and quantitative data  were neglected.  Nevertheless, they undoubtedly played an important part in steering criminologists 

– and eventually also government researchers - away from reliance on traditional ways of  measuring crime towards new and more creative approaches, whether qualitative or quantitative. 

Pressure groups and campaigning  

The search for more systematic information about the nature and extent of ‘hidden’ crimes has also  been strongly influenced by the persistence of groups campaigning or lobbying to get particular  forms of behaviour taken more seriously by the police and criminal justice system.  Most notably,  the pioneering work of feminist writers and campaigners in the 1970s stimulated a growing body of  empirical research on both domestic violence and sexual assault, including surveys of women  which demonstrated that the incidence of both was several times greater than suggested by official  records (Dobash and Dobash 1979; Hanmer and Saunders 1984).   Such research further showed  that domestic violence was not heavily concentrated in lower class households, but found across a  wide social spectrum.  Almost certainly, by pressing police to arrest perpetrators rather than simply  give advice, this campaigning work also had the effect of creating more official records of its  incidence.  A similar pattern of events – with similar results - was evident some years later  following campaigns demanding more government and police action in relation to another largely  hidden form of criminal behaviour, child sexual abuse (in particular, by ‘Childline’, set up in the  UK in 1986).  

The perspective from the victim    

A broader influence on the kinds of data that came to be collected in the 1980s and beyond, was a  general growth in attention to the experiences and needs of crime victims.  This perspective, which  had already been prominent for over ten years in the USA, rapidly began to affect the thinking of  British criminologists and policy-makers, informing debates about, inter alia, the relative rights of  victims and offenders, policing policy, crime prevention, court processes, racial harassment, and   oppression of women (for overviews, see Zedner and Hoyle, this volume; Maguire and Pointing  1988; Walklate 1989; Heidensohn 1989; Maguire 1991; Davis et al 1997).  More important for our  purposes here, it had the general effect of directing attention much more at the offence than the  offender, including the production of large amounts of detailed information about where, when,  how and against whom different types of crime are (or are likely to be) committed.  The most  obvious example of this is the British Crime Survey.  Another is the body of academic work on  residential burglary that emerged in the UK and North America in the late 1970s and early 1980s.   This provided detailed analyses of the circumstances under which burglary is committed, the  motives and behaviour of those committing it, and the experiences of victims (see, for example,  Reppetto 1974; Waller and Okihiro 1978; Brantingham and Brantingham 1975; Maguire and  Bennett 1982; Winchester and Jackson 1982; Bennett and Wright 1984).  The patterns of burglary  identified began to be explained in terms of interactions between, on the one hand, variations in the  attractiveness of targets and in the risks and opportunities they offered and, on the other, the  behaviour patterns of different types of offender.  This work contributed to a more general and  growing theoretical interest in crime patterns as, for example, the product of 'opportunity' (Mayhew  et al 1976; Clarke 1988) or as a by-product of 'routine activities' (Cohen and Felson 1979).  It also  helped to inform new approaches to crime prevention (see below).  

Situational crime prevention  

Another factor in the shift of focus towards the offence, rather than the offender - and hence in the  production of new forms of knowledge about crime - was a growing disillusionment among  influential policy-makers with the idea that crime can be controlled solely, or even principally,  through the traditional activities of the police and criminal justice system (cf. Brody 1976; Clarke 

and Hough 1984).  Faced with the apparent failure of such activities to stem rising crime rates or  reduce re-offending - reflected in the then current mantra ‘nothing works’ (Martinson and Lipton  1974) - the director of Home Office Research Unit, Ronald Clarke, took a decision in the late 1970s  to curtail work on the rehabilitation of offenders and to concentrate research efforts on more direct  (‘primary’) forms of crime prevention.  This led to the formation of the Home Office Crime  Prevention Unit, whose distinctive contribution was the development of 'situational crime  prevention' (Clarke 1980).  Its researchers set out to use detailed crime pattern analysis to pinpoint  areas of the environment which could be altered in such a way as to make it less easy or less  attractive for potential offenders to commit particular types of crime.  This might entail extra  physical security, new design of buildings or vehicles, increased surveillance or the marking of  property (for overviews and examples, see Clarke and Mayhew 1980; Heal and Laycock 1986;  Crawford, this volume).  This 'targeting' approach necessitated detailed knowledge about the  prevalence, geographical and temporal patterning, and typical modus operandi, of particular  offences, thus stimulating the Home Office to fund much more empirical research in these areas.   More recent developments in this general direction include the growth of interest in the ‘mapping’  of offences, as mentioned earlier.      

‘Crime management’ and multi-agency partnership  

Situational crime prevention forged the path for a much broader shift in crime control policy that  has taken place in the last decade or so, revolving around the concept of ‘crime management’.  This  can be seen in many aspects of policing, where ‘intelligence led’ and ‘problem oriented’  approaches have become commonplace, and ‘crime management units’ are found in most divisions.  The general thrust – encapsulated in the National Intelligence Model, which has been implemented  by all forces since 2005 - is towards identifying and prioritising existing or emerging crime  problems (which may concern specific types of crime, groups of known offenders, or locations),  and then deploying resources to deal with the problem (see, for example, Maguire 2000; Maguire  and John 2006).  This has led to the employment by police forces of many more analysts, and the  development of increasingly sophisticated ways of collecting, analysing and presenting local data  for operational use.

Importantly, too, these ideas have spread beyond the police, and have stimulated a major growth in  ‘partnership’ approaches to crime control, notably the development of Crime and Disorder  Partnerships (CDRPs, known in Wales as Community Safety Partnerships).  These are statutory  partnerships of local agencies (among the key players being local councils, police, probation, social  services and health authorities) set up under the Criminal Justice Act 1998 in every local authority  area in England and Wales.  They each have a duty to prepare detailed ‘crime audits’ of their area  (soon to be replaced by ‘strategic assessments’, to make them compatible with the National  Intelligence Model) and to publish plans to tackle jointly the main problems which emerge (see  Hough and Tilley 1998; Crawford, this volume).  Latterly, they have also been given crime  reduction targets by the Home Office in relation to ‘volume crime’.  These requirements have also  given a major boost to data collection and analysis at a local level, including increased data sharing  between agencies and the integration and overlaying of police and criminal justice data with that  from other fields (Corcoran and Bowen 2003).  This allows connections to be established between,  for example, patterns of truancy and patterns and shoplifting, and encourages multi-agency  initiatives to tackle the ‘roots of the problem’ rather than simply arresting offenders.   

In terms of the production of new kinds of knowledge about crime, and their translation into new  kinds of crime policy, the cumulative impact of such developments over the next few years could 

be considerable.  A key aspect of their impact has been the expansion of crime data analysis at  local level, where it can be of direct use in operational decision-making.    

‘Evidence based policy’ and ‘What Works’ 

Closely linked to the notion of crime management is that of ‘evidence based policy’, which became  a mantra of the New Labour government at the turn of the century and underpinned the growth of  the ‘What Works’ movement and the implementation of the ‘Crime Reduction Programme’ (CRP),  an unprecedented £400 million programme of experimental interventions aimed at reducing either  crime rates or reconviction rates (see Bullock and Tilley 2003; Hough 2004: Maguire 2004).  A key  element of the CRP was the evaluation of interventions (to determine whether they had ‘worked’).   This led to efforts by the Home Office to improve the quality and consistency of data used for this  purpose, including conviction data held on the Offenders Index and Police National Computer, as  well as the development of new databases to record, for example, psychometric measures of  offenders attending cognitive-behavioural programmes (see Raynor, Hollin, this volume).  It also  led researchers to seek new ways of measuring changes in the levels of highly specific types of  criminal behaviour such as ‘alcohol related violence’, at local level (Maguire and Hopkins 2003;  Maguire and Nettleton 2003).   

Managerialism and the rise of the performance culture 

Since the early 1980s, when the government introduced the concept of the ‘three E’s’ (efficiency,  economy and effectiveness) as a guiding principle for the public services, criminal justice agencies  have become increasingly subject to inspection, audit, evaluation and other means of testing their  ‘performance’ against defined criteria (Pollitt 1993).  This has grown in intensity over the past few  years, as the government has seen one of its greatest priorities as the ‘modernisation’ of the public  services, and the distribution of resources has come to depend increasingly on local agencies’  performance in relation to ‘targets’ (Hough 2004).  Reliable data with which to measure  performance have become a prime requisite of these processes, and this has generated serious  efforts to control the quality, consistency and integrity of recording practices.  Where crime data  are concerned, an important development has been the introduction and  enforcement of the  National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS), which aims to reduce the gap between the numbers of  incidents reported to the police as crimes and those actually recorded as such (some of its  consequences for recorded crime totals will be discussed later).  Equally important, the need for  rapidly produced data to monitor the relative ‘performance’ of every Basic Command Unit (BCU)  in the country, has led to the development of an internet-based analysis tool (i-Quanta) which  allows the production of monthly crime figures, in a standard format and with little delay, for every  BCU in England and Wales.3 (http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/performance-andmeasurement/iquanta/  

The politicisation of crime and declining trust in statistics  

Finally, many of the advances in data collection and research would not have occurred without  major increases in government funding.  These in turn would not have been sanctioned without the  emergence of crime (as evidenced in opinion polls and elsewhere) as one of the areas of greatest  public concern and as a key issue on the national political agenda.  While it has always attracted  considerable attention, its prominence and degree of ‘politicisation’ over the last decade or so is  probably unprecedented (Downes and Morgan, this volume).  Explanation of this phenomenon is  beyond the scope of this chapter, but it is clear that growing intolerance and fear of crime among  the public, sensationalist media reporting, and exploitation of the subject by politicians have all  combined to produce a general perception that – whatever the official statistics may say - crime is 

‘getting out of control’.  At a deeper level, this has been fuelled by the general sense of insecurity  and heightened awareness of risk associated with life in the globalised economies of ‘late  modernity’ (Bottoms 1995; Garland 2001; Loader and Sparks, this volume).   

The general politicization of crime has also extended to crime statistics, in that doubts are quite  frequently expressed about the reliability and integrity of figures released by the government.  For  example, the BCS was recently dismissed by an opposition MP as an ‘opinion poll’, in support of  his argument that it gave a false picture of falling crime rates and that recorded crime figures  (which showed a recent rise in violence) were much more reliable.  Opinion polls also suggest that  the general public is increasingly mistrustful of all government statistics, and a significant minority  of respondents to the British Crime Survey continue to believe that crime has been generally rising  over the past ten years when both the BCS and police records (the latter after adjustments) suggest  the opposite (Walker et al 2006).  As will be discussed later, this is seen by the Statistics  Commission (2005) as potentially a serious enough problem to warrant the transfer of  responsibility for producing official crime statistics to an independent body.  

To sum up this section, a much more pluralistic situation has developed over the past thirty years in  terms of the sources of data that are used to ‘measure’ crime, the ownership and control of the  processes of collecting and analyzing such data, and the messages about the shape of the ‘crime  problem’ that are conveyed to the outside world through publication of the results.  The counting of  offences officially recorded by the police has thereby been relegated to only one of a variety of  alternative ways of exploring the nature and scale of crime, and the somewhat static, monochrome  picture it produces has been challenged by a shifting kaleidoscope of new pictures produced by a  wide range of individuals and organizations.  This is not to deny the continuing importance of the  traditional recorded crime figures, especially at the level of symbolic politics: on the contrary, the  salience of crime in current political and media discourse ensures that even a small percentage rise  in one category of recorded offences can set off tabloid headlines and heated political debates.   However, they no longer have even the field of ‘official crime statistics’ entirely to themselves.  As  will be discussed later, since 2001//2 recorded crime figures have been published alongside, and to  some extent contrasted with, results from the British Crime Survey, in a new statistical bulletin  entitled Crime in England and Wales (Walker et al. 2006) – a move which amounts to a highly  visible acknowledgement of the limitations of police data.  Similarly, while the Home Office  remains the major player in the field, it no longer has anything like a ‘monopoly on truth’ where  statements about the extent of crime are concerned.  Crime figures now occupy a contested – and  increasingly politicized - area, in which knowledge claims are often challenged, public and media  mistrust of ‘official statistics’ have grown, and the achievement of legitimacy is becoming as  important as the quality of the data. 

INTERPRETING THE STATISTICS  

It is now time to explore in more detail what the available statistics appear to tell us about crime, as  well as the main questions, considerations and potential pitfalls that should be borne in mind when  interpreting them.  We begin with crimes recorded by the police which, despite all the changes  referred to above, remain an important source of evidence for criminologists as well as others.  We  shall then examine what has become the most comprehensive alternative source of information, the  British Crime Survey, looking in particular at ways in which its findings complement, support or  undermine the main messages that emerge from the recorded crime figures.  Finally, comments will  be made on the contribution of a variety of ‘unofficial’ sources of data.     

Although the statistics discussed can be used to tackle all kinds of questions about crime, the focus  here will be on what they tell us about the basic ‘contours’ of crime, and in particular the pictures  they paint of (a) the overall scale of crime, (b) the relative incidence of different kinds of offence,  (c) trends in crime over time and (d) its geographical distribution.    

Recorded crime 

Let us begin by looking at what the traditional ‘official statistics’, based on crimes recorded by the  police, would appear to tell us if we were to take them entirely at face value.  These figures, it  should first be noted, are misleadingly precise.  The latest statistics available at the time of writing  indicate that the total number of crimes recorded by the police in England and Wales in the  financial year 2005/64 was 5,556,513 (Walker et al 2006:30).  As the equivalent total in the  previous year had been 5,640,573, there was an apparent reduction over the period of about one per  cent. 

As the records date back over a very long period, it is also possible to look at long term trends in  such figures.  Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of the raw ‘official totals’ for the whole  of the 130-year period between 1876 and 2006.  The result is a striking pattern, consisting of little  change until the 1930s, a modest rise up to and through the second world war, small falls in the  early 1950s, then a sharp and sustained increase from the mid-fifties until the early 1990s, since  when the totals have appeared to undulate.  This recent change in the pattern, however (on which  detailed comment will be made later), should not obscure the central ‘message’ from the statistics  that during the second half of the twentieth century, there was a dramatic and unprecedented  increase in crime in England and Wales – a message, it is important to note, similar to that which  emerges from the official crime statistics in most other western democracies.5

FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE 

In addition to overall totals, the official crime statistics break recorded crimes down into separate  offence groups.  Table 10.1 shows in simplified form the contributions of the main such groups to  the total number of offences recorded in 2005/6.  The picture of the current `crime problem' which  emerges is one in which, as one might expect, the theft of property looms quite large: theft and  handling offences together with burglaries constitute close to half of the total.  However, the  relative sizes of the different offence groups have changed markedly over time, and despite  increasing in absolute numbers, thefts and burglaries now make up a smaller proportion of the total  than they used to.  By contrast, two offence groups in particular – criminal damage and violence  against the person – have become increasingly prominent.  In comparison with the 1950s, for  example, the most striking difference concerns criminal damage.  Then an almost negligible  category, the number of such offences recorded is now over 230 times higher, and makes up more 

than a fifth of the overall crime total.6  Indeed, the total of criminal damage offences recorded in  2005/6 was over twice the total of all offences recorded in 1955!  Likewise, the raw numbers of  recorded offences of violence against the person are more than 140 times higher than in the early  1950s, rising from under 7,000 to over one million, and now make up 19 per cent of all recorded  crime compared with two per cent then.        

.   

TABLE 10.1 ABOUT HERE 

Of course, none of these figures can be taken at face value.  If they are to be used to say anything  sensible about trends in crime or the prevalence of particular kinds of offence, they have to be  carefully interpreted.  This necessitates close consideration of the possibility that some, or even all,  of a particular change in offence totals does not reflect a change in criminal behaviour, but is a  result of changes in the processes by which the statistics are produced – a comment, as we shall see,  particularly pertinent to the period between 1998 and 2006.  In order to make judgements about  this, it is important to have a good understanding of these processes, as well as to be aware of a  range of key factors that might have an impact on the figures. Confidence in such judgements will  also be enhanced if the statistics are examined in the light of evidence from other sources which  may support or contradict particular conclusions.  Box 1 outlines three of the most problematic  factors, which should always be taken into account.  These will be discussed briefly in turn.   

Box 1.  Key factors which shape recorded crime figures 

1.  Legislation and formal recording rules

 Legislation may create new offences or legalise behaviour that was previously defined as criminal;  definitions of offences may also be significantly changed.   

The Home Office decides which categories of offence will be included in the official total of  recorded crimes; the categories to be included are sometimes changed.    

The Home Office’s ‘counting rules’ also provide guidance on how many individual offences should  be recorded when, for example, an offender repeats the same type of criminal behaviour many  times within a short period; these, too, are subject to change. 

2.  Police recording behaviour.  

Despite rules to limit it, the police inevitably retain considerable discretion as to which of the  incidents observed by or reported to them are deemed to be crimes and recorded as such.  How this  discretion is exercised or constrained can be influenced by a wide variety of social, political and  institutional factors, and may change over time.   

3.  The reporting behaviour of the public. 

The propensity of the public to report crimes to the police may be affected by a range of factors,  including views of the seriousness of particular forms of behaviour, faith in the police, and more  pragmatic considerations such as the need to report offences to support insurance claims; again,  such factors can change over time.  

Legislative change and formal recording rules

From time to time, legislation creates new criminal offences and redefines others, which can cause  considerable problems for the measurement of trends.  One of the most important examples  occurred in 1968, when the Theft Act redefined several key property offences and introduced other  new ones.  For example, the definition of burglary, which had previously been restricted to  ‘breaking and entering’ at night, was extended to include ‘entering as a trespasser with intent’ at  any time, while offences such as ‘housebreaking’ and ‘shopbreaking’ disappeared (Maguire and  Bennett 1982:8-9).  This necessitated several changes to the offence categories shown in Criminal  Statistics, making it is difficult to make meaningful comparisons pre- and post-1968 across a broad  range of property crime.  More recently, the Public Order Act 1986 created several new offences  such as ‘violent disorder’.   

Equally important, the recorded crime statistics do not include all categories of offence.  Recorded  crimes are largely, though not fully, co-terminous with 'indictable' offences - ie those which may be  tried in a Crown Court (Home Office 2001:244).7  This means that a large number of summary  offences (i.e. those triable only in Magistrates' Courts) do not appear in the figures.  No records are  kept of the totals of such offences, although statistics are available on the numbers of people  officially sanctioned for them.  For example, in 2004, around 1,330,000 people were convicted or  formally cautioned for summary (mostly motoring) offences: a total, it is worth noting, well over  double that of people convicted or cautioned for indictable offences (Home Office 2005a).  In  addition, the official recorded crime statistics do not include numerous cases of tax and benefit  fraud known to HM Revenue & Customs and the Benefits Agency, which have investigative and  prosecution powers but which deal with the great majority of cases by using their administrative  powers to impose financial penalties (Levi 1993).  Again, such agencies keep internal records of  the numbers of people dealt with in these ways, or of the total amounts of revenue saved, but not of  the total numbers of ‘offences’ coming to their notice - a task which, given that a single offender  may repeat the same kinds of fraud numerous times over a period, would require complex counting  rules. 

Debates about the logic of including or omitting particular kinds of offence from the recorded  crime totals have periodically led the Home Office to change its instructions to police forces.   These changes have had a significant impact on apparent trends in the total amount of crime.  To  the Home Office’s credit, in most cases the changes have been in the direction of including more  rather than fewer offence categories and hence artificially increasing rather than decreasing the  official totals (this is in contrast to the measurement of unemployment, for example, where it often  used to be said that changes in counting rules had had the effect of painting a ‘rosier’ picture).  The  most important recent example of this occurred in 1998/9, when a number of summary offences  were newly included in the published totals of recorded offences.  The most significant of these  numerically were common assault, harassment, and assault on a constable, which between them  immediately added over 250,000 extra offences of ‘violence against the person’ to the total.  This  created the impression among those unaware of the technical issues, of a major ‘rise in violent  crime’ – interestingly, during a period when, as will be discussed later, the British Crime Survey  indicated that incidents of violence had been generally falling in number.

In addition to the issue of which categories of offence are included, there are important questions to  ask about how individual crimes are counted.  Some kinds of offence tend to be repeated many  times within a short period, to the extent that, though there may be several separate actions or  people involved, they could be considered to form part of one concerted criminal incident.  For 

example, a thief may go through twenty trouser pockets in a changing-room, or try the doors of a  row of cars, or steal a cheque card and use it many times to obtain goods or cash.  Equally, a large  affray - for example, at a demonstration, football match, or nightclub - may involve numerous  assaults by many people on many others; or a man may assault his partner virtually every night for  a period of months or years.  

Prior to 1968, little attention was paid to discrepancies between police forces in the numbers of  offences recorded in these kinds of situations.  However, following the recommendations of the  Perks Committee in 1967, clearer 'counting rules' were established (Home Office 1971), which  tidied up some of the discrepancies, but at the same time appeared arbitrary and inconsistent in  some respects and clearly understated the relative frequency of some offences.  These rules were  revised again in 1980 and in 1998, in the latter case partly to align them more closely with the  counting rules used in the British Crime Survey.  The basic rule is now that, wherever possible, the  statistics should reflect the number of victims, rather than the number of criminal acts.  This  principle was previously applied in relation to violent offences, but was new for property offences.   In the above examples, then, the changing room thief and the cheque fraudster, who might  previously have produced only one offence each, would now produce several (depending upon how  many victims can be identified).  The spouse abuser, as in the past, is likely to be credited with only  one offence, while the affray (again, as before the changes) may produce quite a large number of  offences.  Overall, it has been estimated that the joint impact of the inclusion of more summary  offences and the changes in counting rules was to elevate the total number of recorded offences  between 1997/8 and 1998/9 by about 14 per cent (Home Office 2001: 28).   

Police recording practice 

Of course, Home Office rules provide only the formal framework for the recording of crime.   Within this framework there remains ample room for police discretion, which is inevitable in a  world in which it is often unclear whether a report from a member of the public is truthful or  whether, for example, a ‘stolen’ bag has in fact been mislaid.  While decisions not to record a crime  in such circumstances are often fully justified, discretion can also be misused in order to  ‘manipulate’ figures.  Over the years, some of the main doubts raised about the validity of recorded  crime statistics have revolved around suspicions of this kind.  Researchers have identified examples  of, on the one hand, the ‘cuffing’ (hiding) of offences for reasons ranging from work avoidance to a  wish to improve the overall clear up rate (Bottomley and Coleman 1981; Young 1991)8 and on the  other, the recording (amounting to the ‘creation’) of large numbers of minor offences in order to  elevate the crime rate, for example with a view to supporting a case for more resources.9  More  recently, as increasing importance has been attached to police ‘performance’ in meeting crime  reduction targets, bodies such as HM Inspectorate of Police and the Audit Commission have taken  a closer interest in individual forces’ levels of adherence to recording rules, and have found  numerous cases of breaches, mainly in respect of under-recording (Loveday 2000; Audit  Commission 2004), though the picture is now said to be improving (Audit Commission 2006).  In  2002, detailed national crime recording standards (NCRS) were introduced in an attempt to  improve the overall integrity of police recording practices, as well as to produce more consistency  between forces.  These standards were consciously designed to increase recording rates – in  particular, to bring about a closer correspondence between the numbers of ‘crime incidents’ logged  and the number of ‘crimes’ recorded.  They stipulate a basic assumption that an incident log  containing an allegation of a crime – most commonly, the result of a telephone call from a member  of the public – should be automatically recorded as a crime and only removed from the crime  records, with a supervisor’s agreement, if there is clear evidence to suggest that no offence was  involved (this is known as the prima facie principle – see later).  As Simmons et al (2003)  demonstrate, there is little doubt that the NCRS has had an impact on both police behaviour and 

recorded crime levels, as calculations from British Crime Survey data indicate that the recording  rate (ie the percentage of personal and household 'crimes' reported to the police that end up as  recorded offences) rose from 62 per cent in 2000/1 to 75 per cent in 2003/4 (though it has recently  fallen back to 70 per cent: - see Walker et al 2006: Table 4.04).  Nevertheless, there is a limit to  how far discretion can be constrained, and how closely practices can be monitored.        

Finally, offences 'discovered' by the police themselves - either in the course of patrols or  observation, or through admissions by arrested offenders – have a significant impact on the overall  numbers of recorded crimes.  Not only is the scope for individual officers’ discretion to make or not  to make official reports on incidents much greater than in the case of calls from the public, but the  chances of arrests are affected by changes in policing policy and operational priorities, the extent  and nature of patrolling, or pressures from the public or media to ‘do something’ about particular  kinds of behaviour.  At local level, planned operations or ‘crackdowns’ will often result in an  increase in arrests and the recording of many new offences; for example, strong policing of a pop  festival is almost guaranteed to generate a boost in an area's recorded drug offences, while current  concern about alcohol-related violence has led to greater police presence and more arrests around  city centre pubs and clubs.  Conversely, numbers may fall owing to reduced police interest in a  particular type of crime, as in the early 1960s when, anticipating legislation to legalise  homosexuality, most forces turned a blind eye to 'indecency between males' and the recorded total  of such offences declined to half the previous level (Walker 1971).  It may be that recent messages  from the government that simple possession of cannabis does not necessarily require a police  response, will have a similar effect on recorded drug offences.10

The reporting behaviour of the public 

Despite the importance of offences which come to light solely through police activity, the bulk of  recorded crimes first come to official notice through reports from members of the public.11  For this  reason, changes in the ‘reporting behaviour’ of the public can have an even greater impact on  recorded crime trends.  Decisions on whether or not to report possible offences to the police are  influenced by a huge variety of factors, including views about the police and expectations of their  response, the ease with which reports can be made (to which, for example, the spread of mobile  telephones has made a difference), the number of victims with insurance policies (reporting being  necessary to support a claim) and levels of public tolerance of particular kinds of behaviour.  Over  the longer term, too, major social changes such as the gradual erosion of traditional communities   and the increasing anonymity of life in urban areas may have made people more inclined to call in  the police rather than 'sort the problem out’ by themselves or with neighbours: this applies  particularly to minor criminal behaviour by local children.  

A specific example that has been cited by researchers of reporting behaviour being affected by  views about the police, concerns a rising trend in recorded offences of rape which was evident in  the late 1980s.  This may have been partly or even fully explained by improvements in the  treatment of victims such as the introduction of ‘rape suites’ into police stations and a greater  willingness on the part of police officers to believe their accounts (Blair 1984).  These  developments may have encouraged more victims to go to the police, as well as raising police  recording rates.    

Re-examining recent ‘trends’ 

In the light of the above discussions, the ‘trends’ in crime apparent in Figure 1 need to be looked at  with a rather more critical eye.  While it may be implausible that the steeply rising figures during  the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s were ‘artificially’ created by factors such as changes in counting rules 

or in reporting and recording rates, particularly careful consideration has to be given to the  influence of such factors on the figures since 1998.  To reiterate: 

- 1. In 1998/9, (alongside other changes in the counting rules) offences of common assault,  harassment and assault on a constable were counted in the totals for the first time.   


- 2. In 2002, the National Crime Recording Standard was introduced, instructing police to adopt  a prima facie (and hence more ‘liberal’) approach to the recording of crime. 


These two changes alone have been responsible for a sizeable ‘artificial’ increase in total recorded  crime – indeed, enough to make a downward trend into an upward one.  As will be discussed later,  Home Office statisticians make adjustments in their analysis of trends to take account of the effects  of these and other factors, but (a) such adjustments are based on estimates, not certainties, and (b)  explaining what has in recent years entailed an usually complex set of adjustments to sceptical  politicians, the media and the general public, presents a considerable challenge.           

Comparison between areas: the strange case of Nottinghamshire  

One of the most interesting examples of how official crime rates can be interpreted and explained  through criminological investigation is to be found in relation to their geographical distribution.   Generally speaking, on the basis of a great deal of criminological theory and research, one would  expect police forces covering areas with high density metropolitan or urban populations to have the  highest crime rates (obvious factors include the presence of large areas of deprivation in close  proximity to wealthy areas, the anonymity of city life, and so on).  Indeed, a simple comparison of  recorded crime rates between police forces indicates that this is broadly borne out by the official  statistics.  Table 10.2 shows those forces with the highest and the lowest recorded crime rates per  1,000 population in 2005/6.12  It is clear that most of those with the highest rates include major  metropolitan and/or industrial areas within their boundaries, while those with the lowest rates are  predominantly rural in character.   

TABLE 10.2 ABOUT HERE 

However, there appears to be a major anomaly in the case of Nottinghamshire, a county force  whose per capita recorded crime rate topped that of all the major metropolitan areas, including  London.  The force has been at or near the top of the table for many years, a situation that has long  been an object of curiosity and that has been held up as a prime example of the potentially  misleading nature of official statistics.  Farrington and Dowds (1985) published a detailed study of  police recording practices in the county, from which they concluded that its apparently huge crime  rate relative to its neighbouring counties of Leicestershire and Staffordshire (which are socially not  dissimilar to Nottinghamshire) was a function of (a) a much greater number and proportion of  recorded crimes originating directly from offenders’ admissions to the police (25 per cent,  compared to 4 and 8 per cent in the other forces), (b) a greater number and proportion of recorded  crimes involving property of little value (48 per cent valued at £10 or under, compared with 29 and  36 per cent) and (c) a somewhat higher 'true' crime rate (or, more accurately, a higher crime rate as  measured by public surveys).  The researchers stated: 

'It is reasonable to conclude that between two-thirds and three-quarters of the difference in crime  rates... reflected differences in police reactions to crime, while the remaining one-third reflected  differences in criminal behaviour... 

The research shows once again the difficulties of interpreting official statistics.  Almost certainly,  Nottinghamshire has never been the most criminal area in the country.'  (Farrington and Dowds  1985:70-71) 

Interestingly, Nottinghamshire fell from its top place in the national table in 1981 to fifth place in  1982, a change which, Farrington and Dowds (op cit.) claimed, 

'is almost certainly attributable to changes in police policies for recording offences, which may  have been caused partly by this research project.'  

The foregoing discussion provides us with two messages about the value of the official statistics as  a means of comparing crime rates between areas.  On the one hand, some confidence can be drawn  from the fact that the broad pattern they indicate – ie of higher crimes in more densely populated  parts of the country, and particularly the metropolitan areas - is consistent with the differences one  would expect according to most sociological theories of crime causation, as well as from ordinary  experience.  On the other hand, as the Nottinghamshire example shows, variations in recording  practices can have such a great effect on the totals produced as to render 'face value' comparisons  almost meaningless.  This underlines once again the necessity to treat all police figures with  caution, as well as the point that they can nevertheless yield valuable insights when one probes  closely into the practices which generate them. 

Other considerations and potential pitfalls  

In addition to the above fundamental issues, there are a number of other potential problems and  pitfalls to bear in mind when interpreting recorded crime statistics.  These can be very briefly  outlined and illustrated as follows.    

Short-term ‘trends’  

Although graphic references to the frequency of offences (eg 'A burglary every 20 seconds') are not  uncommon, the kinds of statistic most likely to feature in newspaper headlines are those referring to  apparent trends in crime (eg 'Burglary up 20 per cent').  In many cases, figures wrongly presented  as ‘trends’ refer only to a rise or fall relative to the previous year, paying no attention to earlier  years.  Sometimes, too - a practice which, if used deliberately, is simply dishonest - commentators  refer to a percentage fall or increase since a particular year, selecting as their baseline year one in  which the official total had deviated significantly from the underlying trend.  To take a concrete  example, if one had stated at the end of 1992 that, 'Recorded burglaries have risen by 65 per cent  since 1988', this would have been factually correct, but it would be misleading not to point out that  1988 had produced one of the lowest recorded totals of burglary for many years and that, for  example, the figure had risen by only 45 per cent since 1986.  To represent trends properly, then, it  is necessary at the very least to use figures produced at regular intervals over a sufficient period of  time.   

Frequency and seriousness  

An obvious, but often overlooked, point is that the relationship between frequency and seriousness  is not straightforward.  For example, fraud and forgery appear in recorded crime figures in  relatively small numbers.  However, if one were to measure the importance of property offences in  terms of the value stolen, rather than the number of incidents, fraud would come out as of greater  significance than other categories with many times the number of recorded offences.  For example, 

Levi (1993) points out that the minimum criterion for cases to be accepted for investigation by the  Serious Fraud Office is a fraud of £5 million and that in April 1992, the Frauds Divisions of the  Crown Prosecution Service were supervising cases involving nearly £4 billion.  By contrast, the  combined costs of the prolific offences of 'autocrime' and burglary for 1990 were estimated by the  Association of British Insurers at under £1.3 billion.  (Levi also points out that the alleged fraud in  any one of several major cases - Barlow Clowes, Guinness, Maxwell, BCCI, Polly Peck - alone  exceeded the total amount stolen in thefts and burglaries recorded by the police.)   

Is it the same behaviour? 

Even when the categories of crime appear to be the same as, or similar to, those included in past  counts, the behaviour they refer to may be very different.  For example, the current offence groups  of 'theft and handling stolen goods', 'burglary' and 'fraud and forgery' may be broadly equivalent to  the 1950s groups of ‘larceny', 'receiving', 'breaking and entering' and 'frauds and false pretences',  but they refer to a world in which computers, cheque cards and mass ownership of cars are taken  for granted and where to commit a ‘theft’ or a ‘fraud’, for example, often involves actions which  were simply not possible in the 1950s. 

Populations and property ‘at risk’ 

It is important when comparing crime figures over time or between areas, to consider differences in  the size and composition of the populations.  For example, the population of a town may double  over twenty years, creating many more potential victims and offenders.  To make some allowance  for such differences (especially when looking at long term trends or comparing police force areas)  government statisticians often express recorded crime rates in the form of ‘offences per 100,000  population’.  However, this is by no means the end of the story, as the social characteristics of the  population (eg the proportion of young or old people, or the average income level) may be more  important than its overall size, in determining the numbers of people ‘at risk’.13  Similarly, a major  increase in, say, the numbers of cars on the road, or the numbers of people using cheque cards or  internet banking, means more potential targets for thieves and fraudsters, and is clearly a factor to  consider in any analysis, but it cannot be simply assumed that they are all equally at risk.  Dealing  with such issues is critical to any attempt to make sense of differences in crime figures over time  and space.   

Context  

Finally, it is important not to jump to conclusions about what kinds of event an increase in a  particular legal offence category of offence refers to.  A long-standing criticism of the recorded  crime figures (see, for example, McLintock and Avison 1968) has been that they do not give a clear  picture of the social or situational context of crimes.  For example, 'robbery' includes actions as  diverse as an organised bank raid, the theft at knifepoint of the contents of a shopkeeper's till, and a  drunken attempt to snatch a handbag in the street.  Knowing that 98,204 robberies were recorded in  2005/6, or that this represented an increase of 8 per cent over the previous year, does not tell us  whether specific styles of robbery are declining or becoming more prevalent.  Increases in recorded  robbery in the late 1990s and early 2000s led to considerable political argument (at one point the  term ‘national emergency’ being used) and the setting up at short notice of the high profile Street  Crime Initiative, directed from central government and involving the deployment of 2,000 officers  across ten cities in England and Wales.  However, it emerged later that much of the increase – and  much of the subsequent reduction – in recorded robberies was accounted for by young people  taking mobile phones from other young people, particularly in London (Curran et al. 2005).  While 

this is undoubtedly a problem that should be taken seriously, whether it warranted such a dramatic,  government-coordinated response is highly debatable.   

The old Criminal Statistics provided contextual information, of a limited kind, only in relation to  homicide and offences involving firearms.  It used data from the Homicide Index – which contains  more detail from police records than is collected for other offences - to show, for example, rates of  victimisation by age group (children under one year usually emerging with the highest rate) and  victim-offender relationships by gender (eg 42 per cent of female victims in 2000/1 were killed by  a current or former spouse, cohabitant or lover: Home Office 2001:75-7).14  For firearms it  presented tables on the type of offence involved (violence against the person, robbery, burglary or  criminal damage), type of weapon used (air weapons, handguns, shotguns and rifles/other  weapons), whether or not the weapon was discharged, and the degree of injury caused.     

To conclude this section, it should be clear from the discussion throughout, that the use of police  generated crime statistics to try to say virtually anything definite about crime – including its overall  incidence, patterns and trends – is a pursuit fraught with pitfalls.  Such data are collected by busy  people for a variety of purposes, not by researchers setting out to answer specific questions in a  systematic way.  Over the last few years, especially, they have been subject to major changes in  recording rules.  Importantly, too, they simply do not contain some of the most important kinds of  information that are now in strong demand by criminologists, researchers, policy-makers, crime  analysts, members of crime and disorder partnerships and others: notably, information about the  ‘context’ of events that result in crime, and about the distribution of risks of victimisation among  different social groups.  In the next section, we to look at the main alternative ‘official’ source of  knowledge, the British Crime Survey (BCS).     

The British Crime Survey 

As with the recorded crime statistics, in order to comment sensibly on the status of knowledge  about crime derived from the BCS, it is first necessary to know something about the purposes of the  survey and how its data are collected and compiled.   

First conducted in 1982 and repeated at intervals thereafter, it has been since 2001 an annual survey  with an interview sample of over 40,000 households – large enough to allow analysis at police  force as well as national level.  The main rationale for the survey - and, particularly, for its regular  repetition - is that, by asking samples of the public to describe crimes committed against them  within the past 12 months, the vagaries of crime reporting behaviour and police recording  behaviour are neatly avoided, and the responses can be grossed up to produce a `fuller' (and  arguably more reliable) picture than the recorded crime statistics of the extent of, and trends in,  certain types of offence (Mayhew and Hough 1988). 

The complex sampling techniques used15 are aimed at producing representative cross-sections of  (a) all private households in England and Wales and (b) all individuals aged 16 and over living in  them.  The basic format of the questionnaire, and the framework for presenting the results, were  established in the 1982 survey and have changed surprisingly little since.  The interviews (which  last on average around 50 minutes) are designed first to establish whether the respondents, or  anyone else in their household, have been the victim of any of a list of specified crimes (described  to them in ordinary language) within the past 12 months.16  If any positive answers are received,  interviewers complete a detailed 'Victim Form' for each incident.17  The results are analysed and  grossed up to produce estimated national totals of both 'household offences' (such as burglary) and 

'personal offences' (such as assaults), based on calculations using, respectively, the total number of  households and the total adult population of England and Wales.18

In addition to being asked about offences to which they have fallen victim, respondents answer  questions from a variety of ‘Follow Up Modules’, which elicit their views or attitudes on a range of  topics.  They are also asked to complete ‘self-interviewing questionnaires’ directly on to a  computer screen (which is not seen by the interviewers) on sensitive topics which have included at  different times their own knowledge and use of illicit drugs, and their experiences of domestic  violence, sexual attacks or ‘stalking’.  However, the results of these exercises do not form part of  the core measurement of crime numbers and trends.   

Comparisons between police and BCS data 

The offence categories which are included in the annual estimates of crime numbers produced by  the BCS (known as ‘BCS crime’) are shown in the first two sections of Table 10.3.  The first point  to emphasise (again) is that BCS crime does not cover all kinds of crime recorded by the police.  As  its designers pointed out at the outset (see, for example, Hough and Mayhew 1985: Ch.1), the BCS  is more suited to gleaning information about some types of incident than others.  Those it does not  attempt to ‘count’ as part of the above totals include all crimes against commercial or corporate  victims, fraudulent offences, sexual offences, and so-called 'victimless' crimes such as the  possession of or dealing in drugs.  BCS crime also does not include offences committed against  children below the age of 16 (though, as with several other areas not included in the annual counts,  the Home Office has recently attempted to collect data on these through other survey methods: see  Wood 2005).  Equally important, the survey gathers information on large numbers of  (overwhelmingly minor) personal and household thefts which do not map sufficiently well on to  police categories of crime for direct comparisons to be made between the two sets of figures.   

TABLE 10.3 ABOUT HERE 

In other words, ‘BCS crime’, like ‘recorded crime’, is to some extent an arbitrarily constructed  aggregation of disparate types of offence: both include some offences in the ‘count’, and omit  others.  It is therefore a serious misunderstanding to regard the BCS as offering a full picture (let  alone ‘the true picture’) of ‘crime in England and Wales’.  Indeed, it does not necessarily present a  fuller picture than that provided by the recorded crime statistics: it is 'fuller' than the latter in some  respects (notably the inclusion of unrecorded and unreported offences), but 'narrower' in others  (notably the exclusion of ‘victimless’ crimes, crimes against organisations, and crimes against  children under 16).  

Consequently, it makes more sense to discuss offence categories separately than as an aggregated  group.  While the somewhat arbitrary overall totals of ‘BCS crime’ and ‘recorded crime’ do not  relate directly to any commonly understood category of behaviour, sub-groups such as ‘bicycle  theft’ or ‘vandalism’ have a much clearer social meaning.  Importantly, too, while the overall BCS  and police figures cannot be directly compared, there are several offence categories where it is  generally agreed that meaningful comparisons are possible, once some statistical adjustments have  been made.19  These are known as the comparable subset (see Walker et al. 2006:49): altogether  they contain around three-quarters of all BCS crimes and just under half of all police recorded  offences.  The relevant offence categories, and the estimated totals in each in 2005/6, can be seen in  the top section of Table 10.3.  (The other two sections show the remaining BCS and policerecorded offences that cannot be directly compared.)

In 1983, the authors of the initial BCS summarised the results of a similar comparison as follows: 

'Only for one category - thefts from motor vehicles - were the figures similar.  For instance, the  survey indicated twice as many burglaries as were recorded by the police; nearly five times as  much wounding; twelve times as much theft from the person; and thirteen times as much  vandalism (or criminal damage)...  The overall ratio for incidents which had been compared was  one in four.'   

(Hough and Mayhew 1983:10, emphasis added.) 

It will be seen from Table 10.4 that, though the proportions have changed somewhat, the general  thrust of this statement also holds for the results of the 2005/6 survey.  In 2005/6, the total number  of offences recorded by the police in categories covered by the BCS was around two and a half  million, whereas the BCS evidence suggests that about eight and a half million offences of these  kinds were experienced by victims in the same period - ie about three and a half times the police  total.  The only really striking differences from 1983 concern vandalism and theft from the person,  where it appears that much higher proportions of such offences are now being reported to and  recorded by the police.     

TABLE.10.4 ABOUT HERE 

There is a strong temptation to interpret the overall figures as showing that there is 'three to four  times as much crime' as the official records suggest: a trap into which many people have duly  fallen.  The problem lies in the wide variations between offences in terms of their reporting and (to  a lesser extent) recording rates.  For example, as Table 10.4 indicates, whereas 157,000 (85%) out  of an estimated 185,000 vehicle thefts that were known to victims ended up in the official crime  statistics, this was the case for only 175,000 (19%) of an estimated 919,000 ‘common assaults’.   Such variations mean that the choice of offence groups to include in any comparison can  significantly affect the overall ratio between the police figures and the survey figures.  Indeed, if  the comparison included survey data covering some of the offences in the final section of Table  10.3 - let us say, estimates of instances of shop-lifting or pilfering from work or cheque frauds,  derived from surveys of employers or shopkeepers or bank employees (where the proportions  which end up in police records are known to be tiny),20 this ratio would emerge as much lower.  In  this context, it is worth noting that the overall 'dark figure' estimated by Sparks et al (1977) in their  pioneering victim survey was one of eleven times the police figure, unlike the 'three to four times'  estimate that has emerged from the BCS over the years.  This is partly explained by differences in  the nature of the geographical areas surveyed and in the methodologies used, but also by the  different spread of offences covered.  These remarks are highly pertinent to differences that are  often found between the 'image' of crime presented by national surveys such as the BCS and that  presented by local surveys, which will be discussed later.   

Contradictory trends? 

For much of the 1980s and 1990s, the basic shapes of the trends displayed by both BCS and official  crime statistics were fairly similar.  Between 1982 and 1997, both showed an increase to a peak in  the early to mid 1990s, followed by the beginnings of a downward trend.  Indeed, a statistical  analysis by Farrington and Langan (1998) of the relationship between the two sets of data from  1981-1996, found that they were closely correlated in relation to all four categories of crime  examined (vehicle theft, burglary, robbery and assault).21  The main difference was that, as with  surveys in the USA, the rise in BCS crime was less steep than police figures suggested.  Between  1981 and 1991 recorded crime rose by 78 per cent, while the BCS estimated totals rose by 37 per  cent.  In addition, while recorded crime peaked in 1992, the BCS totals peaked in 1995.     

However, the picture has subsequently become much less clear, and apparent differences in trends  have become the subject of both academic and political debate.  Since peaking in 1995, estimated  BCS crime totals have fallen significantly, showing a reduction of 44 per cent between then and  2005/6 (from over 19 million to under 11 million offences – the latter figure being lower than that  calculated from the very first British Crime Survey in 1982).  By contrast, over the same period, the  raw recorded crime totals have increased (by nine per cent).  As has already been made clear, this  is an artificial increase, all of it (and more) being accounted for by additions to the types of offence  counted, other changes in counting rules, and the introduction of the National Crime Recording  Standard.  Nevertheless, even with these qualifications, there remain some divergences to explain.    

The arguments have centred mainly around violent crime, which has fallen according to the BCS  since 1995 (by 43 per cent), but has risen substantially according to the recorded crime statistics.   Clearly, the counting rule changes have been particularly important here, the inclusion of common  assault and harassment in the recorded crime totals from 1998/9 having had a major effect (see  Table 10.5).  However, even after their effect is factored out, Home Office researchers calculate  that recorded offences of violence still increased by 94 per cent between 1996 and 2005/6 (Walker  et al. 2006:66).  They explain a quarter of this increase as due to the introduction of the National  Crime Recording Standard in 2002, arguing further that ‘it is likely that the remainder of the  recorded increase was largely due to extraneous factors: increased reporting of violent crime by the  public, increased police activity and other improvements in recording by the police in previous  years’ (op cit).   This may well be the case with relatively minor incidents, but it is perhaps less  plausible with the most serious offences of violence (principally serious woundings), which were  relatively unaffected by the changes in counting rules and continued to increase each year even  before the introduction of the NCRS (Table 10.5).   

TABLE 10.5 ABOUT HERE 

This is the nub of the argument, which has become sharpened by the decision to present and discuss  BCS and recorded crime figures together in a new, high profile annual research bulletin, Crime in  England and Wales: the Home Office view appears to be that the BCS provides a more reliable  picture of trends in crime and therefore that the whole of the increase in police recorded violence  must be explicable by reporting and recording changes (though the evidence for this is unclear,  especially in relation to serious violence), while opponents argue that it cannot be so simply  ‘explained away’ (for further discussion see Levi et al, this volume; Hough et al 2005).  Moreover,  some concerns have been expressed that the vigour with which the case is put in the new bulletin is  very different to the ‘neutral’ tone that typified the old Criminal Statistics (where commentary and  interpretation were kept to a minimum) and smacks somewhat of defensive politics.  As will be  discussed later, this has led to suggestions that the task of presenting crime figures should pass to  an independent body.      

Conclusions 

How, then, can we summarise the similarities and differences between the pictures of crime that  have emerged from the British Crime Survey and the recorded crime figures?   First, the central  message sent out by the authors of the BCS during the initial passage of its results into the public  domain was, in essence: the bad news is that there is a lot more crime than we thought, the good  news is that most of it is not very serious.  Their remark about 'the petty nature of most lawbreaking' (Hough and Mayhew 1983:33) was designed to deflect a possible moral panic in reaction  to the huge amount of 'new' crime revealed by the survey, but it also reflected the key finding – 

supported by all surveys conducted since - that unreported crimes generally involve much lower  levels of financial loss, damage and injury than those reported to the police.   

Second, aside from the much larger totals of offences, the BCS produces a basic picture of crime not  wildly dissimilar to that projected by police records: for example, ‘autocrime’ (theft of or from  vehicles) is prominent in both sets of figures, and property crime is more frequent than violence.   BCS crime, even more than the police figures, is dominated above all by offences committed by  strangers: it has been much less successful in identifying ‘serial’ offences such as frequent sexual  or physical assaults by people known to the victim.  Most incidents reported to the survey consist of  discrete incidents in which individuals suddenly and unexpectedly suffer an assault, the theft of or  damage to a piece of their property, or an illegal entry into their house.  Crime in this mode takes  on an appearance in many ways akin to an accident, or an 'act of god' - an almost random event  which can strike anyone at any time, but which is relatively rare in the life of any individual.   

Finally, the overall shape of trends in crime between the early 1980s and the late 1990s emerges as  similar in each case, although the BCS suggests a less steep rise.  The two sets of data also give  similar messages about significant falls in certain offences over the last ten years (notably  burglary).  However, not only are the overall falls in crime since 1995 less sharp in the recorded  crime figures (even after adjustments for the changes in counting rules and the introduction of the  NCRS), but in the case of violence there appear to be contradictory trends, the police statistics  suggesting considerable rises (again after adjustments) and the BCS considerable falls.       

Despite these recent doubts, the BCS has gained the respect of most criminologists as a useful tool  for measuring trends in certain types of crime – notably the clear-cut ‘stranger to stranger’ incidents  referred to above.  One of its impacts has been that few still take the extreme line that the steady  increases in crime indicated by official statistics between the late 1950s and early 1990s were  entirely an artificial creation of data collection processes.  Most now agree, at least, that the  incidence of visible predatory crimes such as burglary and vehicle theft did increase over this  period.  This may not seem a surprise now, but it was a major step for many radical criminologists  to take, and writers such as Jock Young, who with others developed the ‘left realist’ movement in  the 1980s had to fight polemical battles with academics he dubbed ‘left idealists’ to establish his  view that long term increases in these kinds of crime were not only real, but had created a serious  social problem (Matthews and Young 1986; Young 1988a; Rock, this volume).  Indeed, as we shall  see in the next section, his argument with the BCS was that it did not reveal the exceptional extent  and range of crime suffered by particular kinds of victims, principally vulnerable people living in  socially deprived areas.     

ALTERNATIVES AND CHALLENGES TO THE OFFICIAL PICTURE  

As noted earlier, the last twenty to thirty years have seen the development of many new sources of  crime data other than the British Crime Survey.  In this section we examine some of the most  important of these.  First, we discuss the contribution of some local crime surveys that were  conducted in the 1980s with the particular purpose of gathering information about the victimisation  of certain social groups which, their designers believed, were grossly under-represented in recorded  crime figures and in the British Crime Survey.  These surveys provided important evidence in  criminological debates about left realism, and also encouraged some new approaches by the Home  Office researchers responsible for the BCS.  We then look at other efforts, by a variety of  researchers for a variety of purposes, to find out more about types of offending which tend to be  almost invisible in recorded crime statistics and are not readily susceptible to measurement through  conventional crime surveys.  These include domestic violence, child abuse, crimes by and against  businesses, crime in institutions like schools and prisons, and organised and cross border crime.

The challenge from local surveys  

While the BCS has achieved widespread respect among academics, as well as policy-makers, it has  also attracted criticism on the grounds that it gives a distorted picture of patterns of victimisation.   In the 1980s, especially, those writing from a left realist and/or a feminist perspective argued that it  did not sufficiently reflect the experiences either of women or of the very poor (see, for example,  Matthews and Young 1986; Young 1988a; Stanko 1988; Genn 1988; Dobash and Dobash 1992).  It  was pointed out that a large proportion of assaults on women are likely to be committed by people  known to them, including their partners, and that they are unlikely to report these in response to  brief questions from an interviewer on the doorstep.  Moreover, many members of marginalised  groups - the homeless, the mentally ill, those who drift from bed-sitter to bed-sitter, and so on – are  unlikely to have contact with interviewers in a survey based on samples of householders; such  people may also be subject to exceptionally high levels of victimisation.   

To right this balance, some academics conducted rather different kinds of crime surveys.  These  were local surveys, funded mainly by left-leaning local authorities in inner city areas,22 which  aimed to uncover areas of criminal behaviour not seriously touched by the BCS and, equally  important, to examine the extent to which victimisation is unequally distributed among the  population (see, for example, Kinsey 1984; Jones et al 1986, 1987; Crawford et al 1990).  By  focusing chiefly upon inner city areas, such crime surveys brought out much more vividly than the  BCS the extent to which crime is concentrated in some small areas - predominantly those blighted  by poverty.  For example, the first Islington Crime Survey (Jones et al 1986) indicated that a third  of local households had been touched by burglary, robbery or assault within the previous twelve  months: a situation quite different from that of the notional 'statistically average' person referred to  in the first BCS.23

In addition, particular efforts were made to find ways of obtaining more information about sexual  and other assaults on women.  These included less restrictive wording of questions and emphasis on  sensitive approaches to these topics in the training and selection of interviewers.  Again, the results  stand in considerable contrast to the BCS findings: in the Islington survey, significantly higher  levels of sexual assault were found, while over one-fifth of reported assaults were classified as  'domestic' - more than twice the BCS proportion.  Moreover, questions were asked about incidents  which would not necessarily be classified by the police as 'crime', but may be experienced as  serious by victims, namely sexual and racial 'harassment'.  It was found, for example, that over twothirds of women under the age of 24 had been 'upset by harassment' in the previous twelve months.  

One of the most important general insights that emerged from the local surveys was that, while  there are differences in risks of victimisation between broad social groups (male and female, old  and young, etc), such differences can be massive when one looks at very specific subgroups.  A  particularly striking finding in the Islington survey, for example, was that young, black females in  the area were 29 times more likely to be assaulted than white females over 45.  As Young (1988b:  171) observed, such findings illustrate 'the fallacy of talking of the problem of women as a whole,  or of men, blacks, whites, youths, etc.'  Rather, he insisted, criminological analysis should 'start  from the actual subgroups in which people live their lives.' 

A graphic illustration of this point is the early exploration by Hazel Genn (1988) of the problem of  ‘multiple victimisation’.  Genn, who had been involved in a major pilot survey in some deprived  areas of London (Sparks et al 1977) later revisited (and temporarily lived with) some of the female  respondents who had claimed to have been victimised many times.  She gives an eye-opening  account of the way that the lives of these women were blighted by frequent sexual and physical  assaults, thefts, burglaries and other forms of mistreatment, many of them from people with whom  they had some sort of continuing relationship.  Yet this kind of crime, she notes, is lost from view  in most surveys, partly because they tend to impose artificial limits upon the number of crimes that  can be counted for any one victim, and partly because such victims may be less likely than others to  respond to the survey or to admit their victimisation to interviewers.  At the same time, Genn raises  fundamental questions, touched on earlier in this chapter, about how meaningful it is to 'count'  certain crimes at all.  She writes:  

'In asking respondents about their experiences of crime, victim surveys have tended to use an  approach which Skogan has termed 'the events orientation': that which conceptualises crime as  discrete incidents.  This.. can be traced back to one of the original primary objectives of victim  surveys: the estimation of the 'dark figure' of unrecorded crime for direct comparison with police  statistics.  In order to accomplish this,.. information obtained from victims had to be  accommodated within a rigid 'counting' frame of reference.  Although isolated incidents of  burglary, car theft or stranger attacks may present few measurement problems, for certain  categories of violent crime and for certain types of crime victim, the 'counting' procedure leads  to difficulties.  It is clear that violent victimization may often be better conceptualized as a  process rather than as a series of discrete events.  This is most evident in cases of prolonged and  habitual domestic violence, but there are also other situations in which violence, abuse and petty  theft are an integral part of victims' day-to-day existence.'  (Genn 1988: 91)  [emphasis added] 

Many researchers have since come to similar conclusions and, generally speaking, the findings of  quantitative studies of ‘serial’ criminal behaviour such as domestic violence and sexual abuse have  been expressed in terms of the prevalence, rather than the incidence, of the behaviour – that is, the  proportion of a given population that has experienced it, rather than the numbers of individual  ‘offences’ committed.   

Finally, an important related point, also emphasised by Young, is that while it is informative to  examine differential risks of victimisation between social groups, this should be complemented  with an understanding of the differential impact of crime on these groups.  A debate about this  arose from the prominence given in the first BCS reports to findings that younger males, and  people who frequently went out drinking, faced the highest risks of being assaulted.  From these  findings the Home Office authors concluded that the fears of street violence expressed by both  women and the elderly (which were greater than those of young men) were to some extent  'irrational’ (Hough and Mayhew 1983).  Young (1988b:173-5) responded that such a conclusion,  like their argument that fears are exaggerated because much crime is 'trivial' in terms of loss or 

injury, obscures the fact that what are 'objectively' similar events can have enormously different  meanings and consequences for different people: 

'People differ greatly in their ability to withstand crime..  The 'same' punch can mean totally  different things in different circumstances.. Violence, like all kinds of crime, is a social  relationship.  It is rarely random: it inevitably involves particular social meanings and occurs in  particular hierarchies of power.  Its impact, likewise, is predicated on the relationship within  which it occurs...  ...The relatively powerless situation of women - economically, socially and  physically - makes them more unequal victims than men.' 

Later BCS ‘sweeps’ and reports have benefited to some extent from the above kinds of criticisms,  and more attention has since been paid to differential patterns of victimization.  For example,  ‘booster’ samples have been interviewed to explore the victimisation of ethnic minorities (eg  Mayhew et al 1989; Clancy et al. 2001) and separate analysis has been undertaken of crime against  older people (Chivite- Matthews and Maggs 2002).  Computer aided self-interviewing systems –  whereby the interview does not see what the respondent keys in - have been used to explore  sensitive topics such as sexual assaults on women and ‘stalking’ (Percy and Mayhew, 1997;  Mirrlees-Black 1999; Budd and Mattinson 2000; Walby and Allen 2004), although these are not  counted as part of the ‘BCS crime’ totals.  And as discussed later, data have also been collected  from other Home Office surveys on crime against children aged 10-15 (Wood 2005).  

Other sources of data on ‘hidden’ and ‘difficult to measure’ crime 

In addition to the local surveys referred to above, other sources of information have been used by  academics, as well as by a variety of public, private and voluntary agencies, to find out more about  the scale and shape of types of offending not readily measured by recorded crime figures or  national crime surveys.  These tend to cover relatively ‘private’ spheres of activity, notably crimes  that occur in domestic, commercial or institutional contexts: a few examples are given below,  together with some comments on the problems of obtaining reliable data.   

Domestic violence 

Domestic violence against adult women was one of the types of criminal behaviour afforded  particular attention in the 1980s local crime surveys discussed above.  Such behaviour was also  explored in a variety of special surveys of women, mainly conducted by feminist researchers.  For  example, Hanmer and Saunders (1984) found that 59 per cent of 129 women surveyed in Leeds had  suffered some form of threat, violence or sexual harassment within the previous year, and Hall  (1985) and Radford (1987) produced even more startling figures.  Among the most challenging of  all was a survey by Painter (1991), based on a representative sample of over 1,000 married women,  which suggested that 14 per cent had been raped by their husbands at some time during their  marriage - over 40 per cent of them perceiving the incident as 'rape' at the time.24  Other work has  since been carried out to investigate the extent of domestic violence against men (Grady 2002;  Dobash and Dobash 2004; see also Saunders 2002) and between same-sex partners (Ristock 2002).         

However, research into all these issues comes up against major methodological problems, and the  results vary widely depending upon the kind of population sampled, the wording of the questions,  and the situation in which they are put.  Where interviewers are used, the degree of empathy  established between them and the respondents is also a major factor (Dobash and Dobash 2004).   Several such surveys have been based on imprecisely defined ‘samples’ and have lacked rigour in  defining the period covered: clearly, it makes a considerable difference whether one asks if the  respondent has been the victim of x within the past year, past few years, or ‘ever’.  

Child abuse 

An even more ‘hidden’ form of criminal behaviour, a high proportion of which appears to occur  within the domestic sphere (or at least within circles of family or acquaintances), is abuse of  children.  While it is feasible to ask women in surveys about recent physical or even sexual  violence against them, this presents major ethical difficulties in relation to children.  Some evidence  of physical violence and neglect of children can be gleaned from hospital data on ‘non- accidental  injuries’, although what is recorded of course depends on whether children are seriously enough  injured to go to hospital and whether hospital staff recognise their injuries as the result of violence.   Particularly where child sexual abuse is concerned, most evidence has come from samples of adults  who are asked to recall events from their own childhoods.  However, this has major methodological  problems, and has resulted in a wide variety of results (see Straus, Gelles, and Steinmetz, 1980;  Baker and Duncan 1985; Finkelhor and Araji 1986; Morgan and Zedner 1992; Hoyle and Zedner,  this volume)   

As with domestic violence against adults, it makes little sense to attempt the count the numbers of  ‘offences’ which have been committed.  Normally, results are expressed in terms of the prevalence  of victimisation among samples of the population.   However, this too can be very misleading: a  person who has been victimised in a minor way only once counts the same as someone who has  been seriously abused for years.  Thus, for example, a major US study in the 1970s claimed that 30  per cent of all children in the USA had been victims of ‘child mistreatment’, but it was later pointed  out that a different definition of mistreatment would reduce this proportion to only one per cent (see  Levi et al, this volume).    

Crime within institutions 

Another important ‘difficult to research’ area which is still largely neglected concerns crime within  institutions to which outsiders have relatively little access.  These include prisons, army barracks,  mental institutions, children’s homes, old people’s homes, and schools (particularly boarding  schools), which are quite often reluctant to involve the police in any criminal behaviour that comes  to light.  Cultures can also be created in which victims of bullying, sexual abuse or other violent  behaviour find it difficult to get the managers of the institution to take action to stop it.  Collection  of data about the nature and scale of such abuses, even in official investigations, can be extremely  difficult.  Some surveys have been conducted of prison inmates (eg Edgar and O'Donnell 1998), but  this is an area that may be better researched through a variety of qualitative methodologies (such as  in-depth interviews with ex-residents, or participant observation) than through standard survey  approaches.  A valuable edited collection of papers about innovative work on bullying among  prisoners has recently been published by Ireland (2005).  There is also some work on bullying in  schools, mainly based on interviews and questionnaires, but again the proportions of students found  to have been bullied varies widely, depending on the definitions and time frames used and the way  the questions are put (Junger-Tas and Van Kesteren 1999).  Even so, most studies have found the  behaviour to be widespread.  A fairly recent example is a study commissioned by Childline of  1,000 British schoolchildren, which found that more than half of primary school and a quarter of  secondary school pupils said they had been bullied in the present school term; over half also  believed bullying to be 'a big problem' or 'quite a problem' in their schools (Oliver and Candappa  2003).  Research on the other institutions mentioned is less well developed, despite recent high  profile cases involving deaths in army barracks and maltreatment of old people.       

Crimes against businesses 

Crimes against businesses may be committed by members of the public (for example, through  shoplifting or cheque frauds), by employees (though workplace theft or embezzlement) or by other  businesses (for example, through ‘long firm fraud’ – see Levi 1981).  Such crimes all pose  considerable difficulties for measurement.  First of all, in many cases they never come to light: for  example, losses through low level employee theft may be not be distinguishable from legitimate  forms of ‘shrinkage’ (such as goods being damaged at warehouses), and embezzlement by people  responsible for preparing the firm’s accounts can be very difficult to detect.  Secondly, it may not  be clear when losses through theft are detected (often a considerable time after they have occurred)  whether they have been committed by, say, shoplifters or counter staff.  Thirdly, it may be unclear  whether losses are the result of a small number of sizeable crimes by relatively few people or a  large number of minor thefts by a large number of people (or indeed, repeated minor thefts over a  long period by the same person).  Finally, definitions of ‘fraud’, in particular, are fraught with  difficulties, not least because legal definitions – many of which date back many years – are often  out of date in relation to the myriad of new forms of criminal activity that have evolved to exploit  opportunities created by changes in technology and the business environment (though see the Fraud  Act 2006 for an updated approach).  This means, again, that attempting to ‘count crimes’ is often an  unproductive approach in this field.  The scale of such crime therefore tends to be represented in  terms of the prevalence of victimisation (ie the proportion of a given population experiencing it), or  as (gu)estimates of the total amount stolen in various ways over defined periods.    

The Fraud Review (Attorney General’s Office 2006) provides an overview of the limitations of  existing sources in depicting the shape and scale of fraud in England and Wales, and outlines plans  to develop more accurate and comprehensive measures (though these are still at an early stage).  It  notes, for example, that although recorded crime statistics show reductions in cheque and credit  card fraud since 2000, only an estimated five per cent of fraudulent credit card transactions are  reported to the police, so one can have little confidence in such figures.25  It welcomes Home  Office plans that, in future publications of statistics on this topic, police records will be  supplemented with data from APACS, which reflect all cases known to the industry.     

A useful new source of information about both theft and fraud against business is the Commercial  Victimisation Survey (Shury et al. 2005), which surveyed retailers and manufacturers in England  and Wales in 2002.  This found that 74 per cent of retailers, and 53 per cent of manufacturers, had  experienced some form of crime during the year.  Where retailers were concerned, as one might  expect, theft by customers (mentioned by 43 per cent of respondents), by staff (10 per cent) and ‘by  persons unknown’ (20 per cent) were prominent.  In addition, 18 per cent were aware of falling  victim to ‘fraud by outsiders’.  One assumes that these results refer mainly to shoplifting and  cheque card fraud.  Among manufacturers, the most commonly mentioned crime was burglary (22  per cent); only 8 per cent recalled incidents involving fraud.   

There are also some important private surveys of losses to major companies, such as that by Ernst  and Young (2003) and Pricewaterhouse Coopers (2005), which look at fraud on a global as well as  a UK basis.  However, as Levi (2001) points out, these often neglect issues such as whether  international frauds occurred ‘in’, for example, England and Wales, or whether they should be  counted also (or instead) in another country.  In addition, most public sector organisations make  estimates of losses from fraud, some of them using quite different methodologies to that of simply  analysing detected cases.  For example, the Department of Work and Pensions and the National  Health Service takes a sample of transactions in a given area of spend (eg income support, or  patients’ prescriptions claims) and assess them to determine whether the claim was genuine.   Where not, the amount of loss is calculated, and the results are grossed up to produce national  estimates of loss (Attorney General’s Office 2006:31).   

Despite all this activity, however, the overall picture remains very unclear, and many of the  estimates of losses to organisations through theft and fraud remain highly speculative.  There is  little consistency in the definitions or methodologies used, and the quality of the data collected is  often poor.  While it is certainly worthwhile attempting to produce better quantitative measures – of  the prevalence of victimisation, the scale of financial loss, and of other kinds of harm caused (eg  bankruptcies) – it is also worth pointing out that information of this kind is much more valuable if  supported by qualitative research of the kind undertaken many years ago by Ditton (1977) and  Mars (1982), whereby they spent time with people working in, for example, warehouses and docks,  and came to understand the informal cultural rules among employees by which pilfering was  simultaneously accepted as normal but restricted in scale. 

Corporate crime 

Crime by organisations is a somewhat difficult kettle of fish, and much of it is not subject to  measurement by conventional criminological methods.  It may include crimes against an  organisation’s own employees (such as neglect of health and safety rules leading to death or injury  – see Levi et al., this volume), crimes against other organisations (including failures to pay for  orders, and the operation of illegal cartels), or crimes against customers or the general public  (ranging from the sale of sub-standard or stolen goods, through deliberate frauds and ‘scams’ to, for  example, pollution of the environment).  There is no space to consider these here (they are  discussed by both Nelken and Levi in this volume; see also Slapper and Tombs 1999; Croall 2001;  Simpson 2002), but it is worth making the basic point that most insights into the nature and scale of  such offences emerge only when they come to light through a bankruptcy, a police investigation, or  a ‘whistleblower’, and events can be reconstructed through analysis of investigation files, court  records or newspaper stories (see, for example, Clinard and Yeager 1980; Levi 1985; Passas and  Groskin 2001;  Passas and Nelken 1993; Punch 1996).  Of course, ‘participant observation’ is much  harder for academics to do in relation to elite corporate crime than for crimes further down the  ladder.  There have been some attempts to gather data on corporate criminal behaviour that has not  yet come to light, for example by investigative journalists, or to explore the problem in more  general ways through interviews with businesspeople or auditors, but systematic studies are rare  and the overall level of knowledge (and indeed criminological interest) in the field remains low.   This is regrettable given the fact that the scale of corporate offending can be immense: as noted  earlier, international fraud cases such as BCCI, Enron and the Maxwell pension fund each involved  many hundreds of millions of pounds and affected huge numbers of individuals and businesses.   

# International, organized and cross-border crime  

# The growing need for crime data on an international scale has been recognised through the  development of major surveys which collect information in a consistent way across several  different countries at once.  Most notable among these are the International Crime Victim Survey  (Van Kesteren et al. 2000) and the International Crime Business Survey (Alvazzi Del Frate 2005).26 Both suffer from methodological problems and shortages of resources (Barclay 2000), but offer  rich sets of data for analysis.  By contrast, there is very little strong evidence available about the  scale of crime that crosses international borders (such as EU subsidy fraud, money laundering,  smuggling, and drug or people trafficking), and especially about crime of this kind committed by  highly organised groups.  This represents a major challenge owing to the rapidly changing and  well-concealed nature of the activities, and is an area in which conventional methods of gathering  data are plainly inadequate (see Levi, this volume).   

# At present, among the most systematic attempts to summarise what is known about changing 

# patterns of organised crime, inasmuch as it impacts on the UK and Europe, are the regular ‘threat  assessments’ produced by the National Criminal Intelligence Service and Europol.  These are based  on wide variety of data from both ‘closed‘ and ‘open’ sources, and are published in a sanitised form  (see SOCA 2006; Europol 2006).  Otherwise, much of the available information is based on  newspaper reports, court cases, police or secret service agencies’ investigation files and interviews  with convicted organised criminals: getting closer to the ‘field’ clearly entails considerable dangers  to researchers and informants.  Generally speaking, empirical investigations have tended to focus  on charting the numbers, size and ethnic connections of organised criminal groups, rather than  attempting to measure the scale of ‘organised crime’ in terms of offences committed.  The latter,  indeed, comes up against the problem that some kinds of offence are committed as much by  individuals as by ‘organised’ criminal groups (see Levi, this volume, and Levi and Maguire 2004,  for further discussion).     

Crimes by governments and in war 

Finally, both Levi et al. and Hoyle and Zedner (this volume) draw attention to a whole raft of  horrific state-sanctioned crimes, including crimes against humanity, that have to a large extent  remained off the radar of most criminological work (see also Cohen 2001).  Unsurprisingly, figures  on war crimes, torture, or killings sanctioned by governments are not usually gathered or published  by state officials, but by external bodies such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch.   Such data are gradually being used in analysis by small numbers of criminologists (for good  examples, see the Special Issue of the British Journal of Criminology edited by Green and Ward  2005) but are still too rarely thought of as ‘criminal statistics’ – which, of course, they are.          

New data on offenders 

Most of the new developments in data collection that took place in the 1980s and 1990s were  offence and victim focused rather than offender focused.  However, more recently there has been  something of a revival in interest in data about offenders, which merits brief discussion here.     

Just as the annual statistics compiled from police records produce an 'official' account of the extent  of crime, so statistics compiled from court and Crown Prosecution Service records, together with  police records of cautions, produce a picture of all those officially held responsible for recorded  offences.  And just as crime surveys tell us more about unrecorded crime, so ‘self-report’ surveys  tell us more about people who have committed crimes without being caught and convicted.  Let us  begin with a few comments on the numbers and characteristics of convicted offenders and then  look at some data from other sources, including important recent self-report studies.  

Adjudicated offenders 

Until 2001, statistics on offenders who had been convicted or cautioned were published alongside  recorded crime figures in the annual Command Paper, Criminal Statistics England and Wales.  The  crime figures were then removed to a separate statistical bulletin (Crime in England and Wales).   The offender data continued to appear for a few years in publications under the old name, but  recently these have been replaced by, on the one hand, a Statistical Bulletin entitled Offender  Management Caseload Statistics (RDS NOMS 2006) and on the other, a detailed breakdown of  sentencing outcomes in a separate document, entitled Sentencing Statistics (Home Office 2005b).

In looking at the people officially held responsible for criminal offences in any given year, the first  point to note is that they are much lower in number than the offences recorded.  In 2004, about  318,000 people were sentenced in court for indictable offences and a further 156,000 were 

cautioned - small figures compared with the recorded crime total of over five and a half million  offences.  (Many more were convicted or cautioned for summary offences - around 1,330,000 in  2004, of which most were motoring related – but as explained earlier, these do not form part of the  recorded crime statistics.)  Even taking into account the fact that some offenders are convicted of  more than one offence, this means that the great majority of crimes recorded by the police (over 90  per cent) do not result in a conviction or caution, and nothing is ‘officially’ known about who  committed them – though the police may have suspicions about many more.  (Indeed, if one uses  BCS results to bring into the picture crimes not reported to the police, the 'attrition rate' becomes  even more striking: for example, based on data from 1997, it was estimated by Barclay and Tavares  (1999:29) that only about 3 in 100 crimes against individuals or their property had led to an  offender being convicted or cautioned for the offence.)  This so-called ‘justice gap’ has received  considerable attention in recent years, and the government has set targets for the police to ‘narrow’  it by arresting and charging a higher proportion of offenders.27  However, we are more interested  here in the implications for our knowledge about offenders.  Obviously, with such a large  'unknown', it cannot simply be assumed that the characteristics of 'offenders' as a whole can be  inferred from those of adjudicated offenders – a key point which we shall return to in a moment.   First, though, let us look briefly at those who passed through the criminal justice system.   

Among the 474,000 offenders convicted or cautioned for indictable offences in 2004, 80 per cent  were male, and 38 per cent were under 21.  The peak age of offending - that is, the age at which  people had the highest risk of acquiring a conviction or caution - stood at 17 for males and 15 for  females.  The highest proportion (36 per cent) were held responsible for theft or handling offences,  and 17 per cent for violent or sexual offences (for further details, see Home Office 2005a).    

Another, more detailed, picture of adjudicated offenders - in this case, the sub-group thought to  have offended seriously enough to warrant a custodial sentence - is provided by analysis of  information held in prison records.  The most obvious characteristic of the prison population is its  ‘maleness’: despite rapid increases in the numbers of women imprisoned in the 1990s, they still  make up only six per cent of the average daily prison population (see Morgan and Liebling, this  volume).  The most detailed breakdown of the social characteristics of the custodial population was  provided by the 1991 National Prison Survey (Walmsley et al 1992), which analysed a large  sample of records of prisoners over the age of 17 in England and Wales.  The prison population  was shown to be predominantly young: 62 per cent of inmates were aged below thirty, compared  with 25 per cent of the general population.  Disproportionate numbers of prisoners were also found  to come from ethnic minorities: 15 per cent of male, and as many as 23 per cent of female,  prisoners described themselves as black or Asian.  Where social class was concerned, 41 per cent of  males had had unskilled or partly skilled jobs, compared with 18 per cent of the general population. 

Other striking findings included the revelation that over a quarter of prisoners had at some time  been in local authority care (compared with an estimated two per cent of the general population);  40 per cent of male prisoners had left school before the age of 16 (compared with 11 per cent of all  British males); and 13 per cent had been 'of no fixed abode' before coming into prison (for further  details, see Morgan and Liebling, this volume). 

A more recent – and potentially the richest yet – source of data on convicted offenders is the  ‘OASys’ (Offender Assessment System)   This is a standardised tool which is used (mainly by  probation officers) to assess the risk of harm and risk of reconviction, as well as to identify the  ‘criminogenic needs’ of offenders prior to sentence and afterwards (National Probation Service  2003).  It has now been computerised (as ‘e-OASys’) and a new centralised IT system already  holds assessments on thousands of offenders.  This can be analysed to provide detailed statistical 

information on a wide range of issues, including for example levels of drug use, educational  deficits or unemployment among the convicted offender population (National Probation Service  2005:13).  Early unpublished results suggest that high proportions of offenders suffer from major  problems in all these areas, while a study by Clancy et al (2006) found particularly high OASys  scores among a sample of short-term prisoners.   

Overall, the above data clearly illustrate that the social characteristics of people who are arrested  and processed by the criminal justice system - and particularly those who are sent to prison -  present a very different pattern from that found in the general population.  There are many more  males, young people, black people, poor people, poorly educated people, people with disturbed  childhoods, and people with severe substance misuse problems, than one would find in a random  sample.   

Self-report studies

Of course, if only about three per cent of known crimes end in a conviction or caution, it is  important to ask whether the other 97 per cent are likely to have been committed by a similarly  skewed section of the population (or, indeed, by the very same people).  This is the province of  self-report studies - the technique by which samples of the population are asked in confidence  whether they have committed crimes for which they have not been caught.  Many such surveys  were carried out in the 1960s and 1970s, but there was a hiatus until quite recently, when some  sizeable self-report studies were commissioned by government.  These include an international  survey of young people (see Graham and Bowling 1995); the Youth Lifestyles Survey, which  covered many areas in addition to criminal behaviour (Flood-Page et al. 2000); and the Home  Office’s Offending, Crime and Justice Survey, or OCJS (Budd et al. 2005).       

Depending upon the age, sex and other social characteristics of those questioned, as well as upon  the wording of the questions, self-report studies have generally found that between 40 and almost  100 per cent will admit to having committed at least one criminal offence during their lifetime.   Most such studies have used samples of young males, often schoolchildren or students.  For  example, in one of the best early studies, Elmhorn (1965) found that 92 per cent of a random  sample of teenage schoolboys in Stockholm admitted to at least one offence, while 53 per cent  admitted to at least one 'serious' offence (roughly the equivalent of an indictable crime in Britain),  principally theft.  More recently, the first international self-report survey indicated that consistently  high proportions of young people across a range of developed countries had committed at least one  criminal offence (Junger-Tas et al 1994).  The British version of this survey found that nearly a  third of 22-25 year old males (though only four per cent of females) admitted to committing a  criminal offence within the previous year (Graham and Bowling 1995:25).  Moreover, these figures  exclude drug offences, which would have increased them considerably. 

At the same time, most self-report studies have found that much smaller proportions of respondents  admit to frequent or serious offending.  Thus, for example, Graham and Bowling (1995) found that  over a quarter of all offences admitted by 14-25 year olds were committed by just three per cent of  the ‘offenders’, and that only seven per cent of the sample admitted to the most serious offences on  the list (see also Short and Nye 1958; Christie et al 1965; Farrington 1973; Huizinga and Elliott  1986).  In short, as Hood and Sparks (1970:51) put it many years ago: 

'While it may be correct to say that to commit one or two delinquent acts is 'normal behaviour'  for boys, to be involved in frequent criminal acts is apparently relatively rare.'  

Other important issues explored through the early self-report studies included the extent to which  (as suggested by the court and prison data discussed above) crime is committed disproportionately  by males and by people from lower social classes.  Where class is concerned, there were some  fierce debates when different methodological approaches (eg using interviews or self-completion  questionnaires) produced contradictory results.  However, in the end the general consensus seemed  to be, as Braithwaite (1979) put it after reviewing 41 self-report studies:   

'1. Lower-class adults commit those types of crime which are handled by the police at a higher rate  than middle-class adults.  

2. Adults living in lower-class areas commit those types of crime which are handled by the police at  a higher rate than adults who live in middle-class areas.  

3.  Lower-class juveniles commit crime at a higher rate than middle-class juveniles. 

4.  Juveniles living in lower-class areas commit crime at a higher rate than juveniles living in  middle-class areas.'   (Braithwaite 1979:62, emphasis added) 

The use of the phrase those types of crime which are handled by the police is telling here.  This  underlines the point that the offences covered in most such studies are chiefly the common and  visible predatory street offences like burglary and car crime - almost by definition the 'crimes of the  poor' – which occupy a high proportion of police attention, rather than the more hidden kinds of  crime which happen within the private spheres of the commercial world or within the household.  It  is surely unsurprising that surveys reveal them to be committed more often by poorer people! 

Equally important questions have been raised in relation to both race and gender.  These are highly  complex and there is no space to do them justice here (though relevant discussions can be found in  Bowling and Phillips, and in Gelsthorpe and Heidensohn, in this volume; see also Smith 1997).   Where race is concerned, it will simply be noted that one of the most significant findings is that,  despite the relatively high proportions of black people who are prosecuted and imprisoned, there  tend to be few differences between black and white respondents in terms of offences admitted to  self-report studies.  Indeed, in some surveys, white respondents report higher offending rates than  black respondents: this was apparent in recent findings from the OCJS (see Sharp and Budd 2005).   To what extent these kinds of findings reflect 'reality' (and hence biases in the police and criminal  justice system – see Hood 1992) and to what extent they arise from the unreliability of the selfreport method – and/or differences in trust in the confidentiality of surveys and hence in  willingness to admit offences - remains unclear.  However, one area in which the pictures painted  by both court data and self-report studies are in close agreement is that of low offending rates on  the part of people with an Asian background.      

Where gender is concerned, by contrast, self-report studies have generally reflected the picture that  emerges from data on adjudicated offenders – ie that males are greatly over-represented among  ‘offenders’.  For example, Graham and Bowling (1995:13) found that males were, respectively,  eight, six and four times more likely than females to admit to having committed burglary, car theft  and theft from vehicles.  As Heidensohn (1989:87) once put it: 'There is little or no evidence of a  vast shadowy underworld of female deviance hidden in our midst like the sewers below the city  streets.’  At the other extreme, as women are still greatly under-represented in the high level  positions in business from which markets can be manipulated or major frauds perpetrated, it is  probably safe to assume that corporate crime, too, is overwhelmingly a male province.  

The OCJS 

The most important recent self-report study is the Home Office’s Offending, Crime and Justice  Survey (OCJS).  This was first conducted in 2003 with a sample of 12,000 people aged 10-65 living  in private households in England and Wales (Budd et al. 2005).  Its main aim is to explore the  extent of offending, ‘anti-social behaviour’ and drug use, particularly among children and young  people. In addition to many of the BCS offences such as burglary and assault, the survey covers  self-reported shoplifting, fraud and technology offences.  It also helps to fill a gap in the BCS  coverage by asking children from the age of 10 upwards questions about their experiences as  victims of crime.  Finally, it has a longitudinal element, re-interviewing some individuals at  intervals to glean more information about changes over time and ‘pathways’ into and out of  criminal and anti-social behaviour.   

In addition to general findings on self-reported offending, more specialised reports have been  published on, inter alia, underage drinking (Matthews et al. 2006), ‘binge drinking’ (Matthews and  Richardson 2005), drugtaking (Becker and Roe 2005) and fraud and technology crimes (Wilson et  al. 2006).  The survey is also interesting in that it attempts to quantify the prevalence of ‘antisocial’  as well as criminal behaviour.  In this it is to some extent following in the footsteps of early selfreport studies, many of which blurred the distinction between crime and ‘delinquency’: thus  questions to young people about stealing were quite often interspersed with questions about  behaviour such as ‘smoking’ or 'defying parents' authority' and in some cases the responses were  included with criminal behaviour in global estimates of the prevalence of ‘delinquency’.  OCJS  reports do make a distinction: for example, Hayward and Sharp (2005:1) found that ‘about 17% of  young people had committed antisocial behaviour but no more serious offence.  12% had  committed both antisocial behaviour and offences’.  However, this does not resolve questions about  the definition of ‘antisocial behaviour’, which not only appears to have no clear rationale, but  includes ‘joyriding’ and ‘racial harassment’, both of which are likely to entail criminal behaviour. 

Concluding comments 

In the light of results from self-report studies, there now appears to be relatively little dispute about  the broad validity of the general picture, as reflected in the official statistics, of the relative  'contributions' as offenders of males and females, but there is much more argument about other  major social groups, particularly around social class and ethnicity. 

Where the persistent commission of common predatory street offences is concerned, it is true, both  'official' and 'self-reported' offenders emerge with a not too dissimilar profile (young, male and  poor) - partly, one may presume, because few persistent burglars or car thieves succeed in escaping  conviction entirely.  However, this does not alter the vital point that, just as victim surveys are  vastly more effective in revealing 'hidden' instances of some kinds of crime than of others, so the  perpetrators of different kinds of offence are not equally well 'revealed' through the medium of selfreport studies.  Thus, while respondents tend to be asked in great detail about the kinds of antisocial activity which are associated with the arrests or court appearances of adolescents, they are  not often asked whether they have assaulted their partners or sexually abused their children, nor  whether they have perpetrated a significant financial fraud.  If it were possible to overcome the  ethical problems of expanding self-report studies into such sensitive areas, the results might well  support the indications from some (also methodologically problematic) victim surveys, that the  perpetrators of intra-family violence and abuse are much more evenly distributed throughout the  population (see Morgan 1988; Morgan and Zedner 1992; Dobash and Dobash 1992; though for  scepticism on this point, see Levi et al.., this volume).  And without doubt, if they were expanded  into the commercial sphere, they would confirm that the social class distribution of people involved  in business fraud is skewed in a different direction to that of burglary and street robbery. 

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND EMERGING ISSUES 

We return in this last section to some of the broader questions that were raised at the beginning of  the chapter about the relationship between crime data and changing attitudes and approaches to  crime and its control.  We focus on developments in the early 2000s, particularly on changes in  Home Office approaches to the collection and presentation of criminal statistics.  These changes  have been driven to a large extent by new data demands from policy-makers and practitioners.  On  the one hand the demands relate to new operational needs, and on the other to the high priority  attached by government to performance monitoring and management of the police, criminal justice  agencies and local partnerships.   

As discussed earlier, the rhetoric – and to a lesser extent the practice - of crime control has moved  increasingly in recent years in the direction of ‘evidence based’ and ‘problem oriented’ approaches,  in which the nature and scale of crime or disorder problems are identified through analysis of a  variety of data sources and (ideally) responded to in a planned fashion.  Much of this activity now  takes place at local level  and is undertaken by local partnerships (especially Crime and Disorder  Reduction Partnerships – see Crawford, this volume), although the Home Office plays a major part  in terms of disseminating ‘good practice’ and monitoring the results.  The National Intelligence  Model, too, is increasingly being used as a framework to guide the process of collecting and  analysing data, planning and implementing interventions and monitoring the results (John and  Maguire 2003; Maguire and John 2006).  Such approaches and systems require a great deal of data:  for example, detailed information about offences which allows analysts to identify crime patterns;  data that can be used to monitor interventions; and data that can supply reliable evidence of any  changes that these have produced.  To be of real use, practitioners argue, such data must be: 

- o comprehensive (to give as complete a picture of the problem as possible) 
- o reliable (to avoid misunderstanding it)      
- o timely (data a year out of date is of little use operationally) 
- o context rich (to allow greater understanding of the problem) 
- o local (national or even police force-level data provide only ‘background’). 


At the same time, the passion for target-setting and performance monitoring in the Home Office has  created a parallel demand for data produced both with integrity and in a consistent and standardised  fashion.  This applies particularly to police crime records, which are used as the main measure of  performance at Basic Command Unit level (BCS data can only be used at force level and above),  and have come under increasingly close scrutiny by bodies such as the Audit Commission (2004).          

The Simmons report and its aftermath 

In 2000, the Home Office published a far-reaching report entitled Review of Crime Statistics, which  put forward plans to respond to many of the above challenges.  The report set out a vision of a  ‘modernisation’ process, ‘[a revision of] the philosophy underlying the production of statistics’, in  which ‘19th century’ aims and practices’ would be replaced by 

 ‘a more flexible view of information – one where we first define the problems requiring solution  and then develop the information needed to better understand those problems,..  rather than rely  on the routine statistics supplied in summary form by the police.’  (Simmons 2000:ii). 

The recommendations included the replacement of the traditional Criminal Statistics with an annual  ‘Picture of Crime in England and Wales’ incorporating data from a range of sources including  police crime and incident data, the British Crime Survey, research studies, and information from  other agencies and institutions.  The central focus on legally defined offences would also be  weakened, more attention being given to social definitions of crime and to non-crime events which  cause concern to the public.  In addition, more detailed and more comprehensive data would be  recorded on crime and disorder, including postcodes or grid references of the locations of incidents,  which can be used to ‘map’ crimes to identify ‘hot spots’; more information about the immediate  context and modus operandi of offences; and victims’ views of offenders’ motives and of the  seriousness of incidents.  Indeed, the author looked forward to systems of data collection in which a  common incident record format is used by every police force, and part-records of individual cases  (as opposed to simply counts of offence types) can be transferred electronically to the Home Office,  hence allowing more analysis to be undertaken centrally.  If such information was to be useful, it  was argued, it had to be as comprehensive as possible.  Policies should therefore be introduced to  encourage or compel police officers to   

‘ensure that every incident relating to crimes, allegations of crimes and also disorder that is  brought to their attention is recorded as an incident (or ‘call for service’)’    (Simmons 2000:19,  original emphasis) 

This report provides a good illustration of the theme explored in the early part of this chapter, that  decisions about how to collect and present crime data do not occur in a vacuum: they respond to the  changing demands of the ‘consumers’ of the information and to the dominant preoccupations of the  day.  It argues, in essence, that there is no longer any strong demand for a crude general  ‘barometer’ of the level of crime, constructed from simple counts of recorded offences.   Instead,  the demand now tends to be for more malleable and contextualised forms of information with  which to assess and respond quickly to the new and highly specific ‘problems’ and ‘risks’ which  emerge at frequent intervals to preoccupy the public, politicians and media.  

A number of important changes followed the publication of the report, not all of them in line with  Simmons’ recommendations.  It is argued that these have cumulatively produced some significant  improvements from the viewpoint of policy-makers and practitioners, not least some detailed and  informative statistical bulletins on specific kinds of offence, based on deeper analysis of police  records, supplemented by information from other sources including the BCS (see, for example, the  enhanced analyses of homicide and gun crime in Coleman et al. 2006).  At the same time, these  gains have come at the price of some problematic unintended consequences in terms of reactions  from the public, media and politicians.  The focus here will be on two of the most important  changes in this respect: (a) the introduction of the National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS),  based on a ‘prima facie’ approach to crime recording, and (b) the publication and discussion of  BCS results and recorded crime figures in the same bulletin.  

The NCRS and ‘crime inflation’ 

The National Crime Recording Standard was introduced in April 2002 in order to introduce more  integrity and consistency into police recording.  Its most important feature in terms of impact on  recorded crime was the adoption of the prima facie (as opposed to ‘evidential’) principle.  In its  most extreme form, this means that a member of the public’s claim to have been the victim of a  particular crime should be taken at face value and a crime report made reflecting their account,  rather than allowing the police to discount it immediately as mischievous or mistaken (Burrows et  al 2000).28  Simmons had recommended that this principle should be applied to incident data, but  not to recorded crime, but the view of the police service and HM Inspectorate of Constabulary 

prevailed and it was applied (though not to this extreme degree) to crime records.29  As noted  earlier, this had a substantial inflationary effect on recorded crime levels, and has made the  identification of recent trends very difficult.  Moreover, this is only one of a number of recent  developments around reporting and recording which have had a similar effect.  These include the  changes to the counting rules in 1998/9 (particularly the addition of common assault and  harassment to the crime categories counted).  More recently, plans are in place for the introduction  of a ‘single non emergency number’ (SNEN), which will make it easier for people to report lowlevel crime and disorder (see http://snen.homeoffice.gov.uk/), as well as for the introduction of a  national incident recording standard, which will encourage the police to record reports of this kind  more consistently than in the past.  It is likely that both these developments, which reflect a more  general tendency for the borderline between crime and ‘antisocial behaviour’ to becoming blurred,  will further increase crime reporting and recording of crime, and hence contribute to further  inflation of the crime figures.       

This ‘inflation’ is not necessarily a problem for practitioners or policy-makers: on the contrary, the  standardisation of recording practices should eventually assist those concerned with performance  monitoring, while more comprehensive reporting and recording of offences should be of assistance  to those concerned with analysing crime problems and planning responses.  On the other hand, it  can have some less welcome consequences.  First of all, it makes analysis of both national and local  trends, in the short term at least, a complex and problematic task.  Secondly, to the untutored eye  (and to political opponents looking for an angle of attack on the government) it gives a strong  impression that ‘crime is rising’, when most of the available evidence, if carefully analysed, does  not support this as a general conclusion.  As crime has become a highly charged political issue,  media treatments of the release of statistics tend to look no further than the raw figures, and show  little interest in ‘technical’ arguments that there have ‘actually’ been falls, not rises.  Indeed, they  are likely to regard the latter as simply ‘spin’ (see below).      

 Joint analysis of BCS and recorded crime: the problem of trust 

As noted earlier, from 2001/2, the traditional annual publication Criminal Statistics England and  Wales was replaced by a new annual bulletin with named authors, entitled Crime in England and  Wales (see for example, Walker et al. 2006).  The new bulletin not only presents BCS results  alongside recorded crime figures, but has added a great deal more analysis, interpretation and  discussion (of both sets of data) than was previously included.  Indeed, it now has much more the  appearance and style of a Home Office research report than of a statistical publication – not least in  that the ratio of text and analysis to tables has significantly increased.      

While this move has been generally welcomed by specialists, including academics, as a more useful  and informative approach, once again it has come at a price in terms of communication with the  public.  The publication in one high profile ‘official’ bulletin of two sets of statistics which at first  glance appear to be moving in different directions, inevitably creates a certain amount of public  confusion.  More than this, to the growing numbers of people already inclined to treat government  statistics with suspicion (see, for example Duffy et al. 2005), it may be seen as another example of  the government ‘spinning’ bad news.   

Perhaps of more concern, the presentation of complex statistical analysis on a controversial subject  in a highly charged political climate places considerable pressures on the civil servants charged  with this task.  These pressures include fears that the media will deliberately misinterpret the data  and look only for negative news, and perhaps concern about upsetting political masters.  The old  Criminal Statistics contained relatively little analysis as such, and consisted mainly of tables, but 

the new statistical bulletins encourage analysis and interpretation and are as such a ‘different  animal’.  There is undoubtedly a risk that pressures of the above kind will lead the analysts,  consciously or unconsciously, to focus on what appear to be the more positive conclusions that  emerge from the statistics: in other words, indeed to engage in something approaching ‘spin’.   Arguably, there are some signs of ‘defensive’ interpretations of the data in the most recent bulletin.   As described in the last section, the discussion of trends in violent crime could be seen in this light  (Walker et. al. 2006:66), while the use of language such as ‘settling down’ (p.4) and ‘stabilising’  (p.13) to describe trends, could be interpreted as part of an attempt to sound reassuring.  Of course,  in an era when ‘spin’ itself is a high profile political issue, any hint of such defensiveness – whether  intentional or not - will be quickly identified and criticised, adding to the general sense of mistrust  of government statistics that already exists.  The Statistics Commission (2005:4) puts a similar  point rather more strongly: 

‘[O]ur impression is that, faced with a sceptical and at times antagonistic press, the Home Office  and other official bodies have sought to contain the flow of statistical messages – prescribing the  frequency and form in which statistics are released, and making sure that policy responses are  issued at the earliest possible moment, sometimes ahead of the figures themselves.  Whilst there  is inevitably an element of conjecture in this ‘outsider’s analysis’, we believe that any such  control is almost always counterproductive in terms of public confidence.  It creates an  environment in which the media and public assume that they are receiving a filtered,  government friendly, version of the truth – even though the statistical message may not be either  of those things.’  

The Statistics Commission is at the time of writing completing a review of crime statistics in which  it will almost certainly echo the view in its interim report that, in the light of these problems of  trust, the governance of ‘official statistics’ should be placed into independent hands – a view  already endorsed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Statistics Commission 2005:3).  Of course,  whether this in itself would be sufficient to allay public and media cynicism and distrust is by no  means certain.     

Concluding comments 

In the spirit of the above discussion, if there are two key ‘messages’ to take from this chapter, they  are probably the following: 

- 1. Crime statistics are not simple reflections of ‘facts’, but one of many possible tools for  gaining a better understanding of the highly complex and rapidly changing forms of  behaviour that can be described as ‘crime’.  A ‘rise (or fall) in crime’ indicated by police  records or survey results, should be regarded as an important piece of evidence about, rather  than conclusive proof of, changes in the scale and patterns of such behaviours. 


- 2. Crime statistics are not immune from political and social change, and the ways in which  data about crime are collected, analysed and presented (and the importance and resources  attached to them) are both influenced by, and influence, changes in thinking about the  nature and importance of the ‘crime problem’ and how to respond to it.     


ENDNOTES 

1 However, modern databases which hold information about individuals, such as the new central IT system  which will store all ‘e-OASys’ risk/needs assessments undertaken on convicted offenders in England and  Wales can also be used to provide statistical information - for example, to measure the extent of drug  problems among the convicted offender population.      

2 The Catchem (Centralised Analytical Team Collating Homicide Expertise and Management) database was  set up 1986 and now holds details on forty years of homicide cases involving younger victims of homicide,  especially sexually motivated child homicides.  For discussions of the Homicide Index, see Brookman  (2005) and Levi et al., this volume.  

3  http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/performance-and-measurement/iquanta/ 

4 Before 1997, criminal statistics were presented on the basis of calendar years, but have since moved to  accord with the financial year (April to March). 

5 An interesting exception was Switzerland, which produced such low crime rates that a distinguished  American criminologist (Clinard 1978) wrote a book attempting to explain why. 

6 Between 1950 and 1954, the average annual recorded total of 'malicious injuries to property' was just over  5,000; in 2005/6, recorded offences of criminal damage totalled over 1,180,000.   

7 'Indictable is used here as shorthand for offences which are either 'triable only on indictment' (ie in Crown  Court) or 'triable either way' (ie in either Crown or Magistrates Court) under the 1977 Criminal Law Act.  

8 The more 'hopeless' cases, in terms of their potential for detection, that are omitted from the figures, the  higher the proportion detected (the clear up rate) is likely to be.  If a division's or force's clear up rate is  exceptionally low, officers (especially those in the CID) can expect criticism from management as well as,  in some cases the media.  There is thus some incentive to 'massage' local crime statistics to avoid such  criticism (for a first hand account of police behaviour in this respect, see Young 1991). 

9 One particularly strong critic in this regard, Hal Pepinsky, showed how significant increases in crime could  be created simply by assiduously recording every trivial offence that comes to light: for example, in a small  unpublished study in one subdivision of a British city he claimed that almost half the year's 'increase in  crime' had been produced by the police recording every admission by a single offender who frequently stole  milk bottles from doorsteps.  On a wider scale, Selke and Pepinsky (1984) claimed that rises (and occasional  falls) over time in crime figures in Indiana could be shown to coincide closely with shifts in the political  needs of the party in power (see also Pepinsky 1976).  . 

10  In 2005/6, there were 178,502 recorded drug offences, 119,922 (67%) of which were possession of  cannabis.  

11  McCabe and Sutcliffe (1978) calculated this from samples of records at about 85%. 

12  Of course, some forces are much larger than others, so a straightforward comparison of raw totals of  crimes would be meaningless.  In order to afford a more equitable means of comparison, crime rates are 

often expressed in terms of numbers of recorded offences per 1,000 population (long-term changes over time  are similarly adjusted in some of the national statistical tables to take into account changes in the  population). 

13 As Bottomley and Pease (1986:11-12) long ago pointed out in relation to changes in one area over time:   

'We should beware of easily reaching the conclusion that 'people commit crime, therefore more people can  be expected to commit more crime' so that if the ratio between crime and population is unchanged then there  can be nothing which requires an explanation.  It can be seen at once that underlying such an assumption is  an emergent theory about rates of offending, and possibly about rates of victimization, which leaves itself  wide open to a series of supplementary questions such as whether all members of a population are equally 'at  risk' of offending...what significance should be attached to the gender composition of the population ...[and]  given the change in the pattern of criminal opportunities, should one adjust for social changes like the  number of cars registered.' 

14  For a comprehensive academic analysis of data from the Homicide Index, see Brookman 2005. 

15 For the first three surveys, the households were selected from the Electoral Register, but since 1992 the  Postcode Address File (PAF) has been used as the sampling frame, it being argued that this produces a better  representation of the population: the Electoral Register may significantly under-represent young people, the  unemployed, ethnic minorities and those living in rented accommodation (Mayhew et al 1993:149-151;  Grant et al. 2006).   

16 In order to facilitate comparison with the previous year's official crime figures, the survey used to be  conducted between January and April, people being asked to recall incidents within the previous calendar  year.  However, now that the police generated figures cover the financial (April to March), the need for this  has disappeared and the BCS has moved to a ‘rolling’ programme of interviews in which people are asked  simply about incidents occurring during the past 12 months.  

17 Up to a maximum of six separate incidents.  However, if the respondent reports a number of similar events  involving the same offender, these may treated as one 'series incident'. 

18 As the total interview sample deliberately includes an over-representation of households from denser  urban areas (to maximise the chances of finding 'victims' to interview), the calculated victimisation rates are  weighted to take account of this (see Kershaw et al 2001:89.  For the latest technical report on the BCS as a  whole, see Grant et al. 2006). 

19  These mainly entail removing from the police figures estimated numbers of offences committed against  young people or against corporate victims (see Walker et al. 2006:49). 

20 See, for example, Martin (1962) and Levi (1993). 

21 By contrast, however, a similar analysis of American data found much weaker correlations and, where  assault was concerned, no systematic relationship at all between official and survey figures. 

22 Since then, however, local surveys crime have been carried out, for a variety of other purposes, in many  different kinds of environment, including rural areas (Koffman 1996). 

23 In the first BCS report, it was calculated that a 'statistically average' person aged 16 or over could expect  to fall victim to:  

* a robbery once every five centuries (excluding attempts) 

* an assault resulting in injury (even if slight) once every century 

* a family car stolen or taken by joyriders once every 60 years 

* a burglary in the home once every 40 years. 

The authors added that ‘These risks can be compared with the likelihood of encountering other sorts of  mishaps: the chances of burglary are slightly less than the chances.. of a fire in the home; the chances a  household runs of car theft are smaller than the chances.. of having one of its members injured in a car  accident.'  (Hough and Mayhew 1983:15) 

24 The question used was 'Have you ever had sex with your present husband (or previous husband) against  your will, when you had clearly insisted that you did not want to and refused your consent?' This is a legal  definition of rape, though despite court decisions which mean that a man can be convicted of raping his  wife, it is unlikely that many police officers would arrest on allegations of refused consent by a wife living  with her husband, without evidence of violence. 

25 While the BCS does not regularly count frauds against individuals, it has recently included some relevant  questions, the results of which are reported in Wilson et al. (2006).  These indicate, for example, that only 3  per cent of card users were victims of credit card fraud (to their knowledge, of course) in 2003/4.  On the  other hand, around half worried about it, especially in relation to internet use. 

26  The ‘Eurobarometer’, a regular survey of public opinion in Europe has also asked some crime related  questions.  See http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/index_en.htm. 

27 http://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/docs/justicegap.pdf

28  This principle of ‘believing the victim’ had previously been applied to allegations of rape, and later  (through police instructions issued following the Stephen Lawrence case) to allegations that an offence was  racially motivated.   

29 Crimes can be removed from the records with the agreement of supervisors if there is evidence that the  report was mischievous or mistaken.   

