184

|Article|
|---|


# Taking Crime Seriously: Playing the Weighting Game

## Dainis Ignatans and Ken Pease

Abstract The advantages and problems of weighting crime counts by harm inﬂicted are detailed. To obtain a better understanding of crime trends and distributions, victim judgements of the seriousness of offences committed against them derived from the Crime Survey for England and Wales (CSEW) were analysed and used as weights of crime counts. The data were used to check whether there was a seriousness drop paralleling the crime drop of recent decades. There was, albeit somewhat less precipitous. Series crimes (i.e. repeated crimes against the same targets and presumed to be by the same perpetrators) account for an astonishing 39% of all crime and around 42% of crime weighted by seriousness. The article focuses on distributions across households. In line with our earlier work on crime events per se, the most victimized households have beneﬁted most from the seriousness ‘drop’ in absolute terms, but still account for a similar proportion of total harm over time. A case is made for the use of CSEW victim seriousness judgement for a variety of analytic and practical purposes.

Introduction

Sherman et al. (2014, p. 1) observe:

The logic of simply summing crimes of all kind into a single total has long been challenged as misleading. All crimes are not created equal. Counting them as if they are fosters distortion of risk assessments, resource allocation and accountability.

Unquestionably, crime counts per se represent an inadequate basis for crime policy, as would a count of hospital admissions without an understanding of the presenting proﬁle of patient conditions. The ultimate beneﬁt Sherman et al. see as accruing

from a weighted count is clarity for evidencebased policies,

providing a standard ‘bottom line’ for crime in cost-effectiveness comparisons of alternative strategies . . . . (p. 1)

In the shorter term, they see a weighted index as affording a better underpinning for national and local trends and comparisons. Such an index also permits a more nuanced analysis of criminal careers. Sherman et al. make the telling point that better resourcing decisions would ﬂow from weighted measures of harm, given the ﬂaws in current funding arrangements (Pease, 2008).

The Cambridge Harm Index (CHI) whose development is very brieﬂy described below is intended

University of Huddersﬁeld, Ramsden Building, Queensgate, HD1 3DH, UK. E-mail: D.Ignatans@hud.ac.uk Jill Dando Institute, University College London, 35 Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9EZ, UK. E-mail: k.pease@ucl.ac.uk

Advance Access publication: 18 September 2015 Policing, Volume 10, Number 3, pp. 184–193 doi:10.1093/police/pav029

The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

ﬁrst to be applied in evaluating criminal career changes induced by an upcoming experiment (Neyroud, 2015) of an actuarially based triage system of offender allocation to treatment (Neyroud, personal communication). This approach echoes an earlier attempt to measure penal efﬁcacy by weighting crimes according to their seriousness (Pease et al., 1977). Harm inﬂicted is arguably a better measure of offender change than reconviction per se, with the proviso that cumulative harm across offences forms part of the calculation.

If weighting crime counts is deemed useful, how is it best realized? Sherman et al. (2014) identify four possible ‘metrics’ for the weighting process.

Public opinion Financial cost Sentences imposed Sentencing guideline ‘starting points’.

The CHI lies within a quite long tradition of weighting crimes wherein the ﬁrst three approaches listed above have all been tried. The approaches overlap. An offence deemed serious merits the expenditure of more resources for its investigation because it is serious and a longer average or starting point for sentencing for the same reason. Weighting crime on the basis of public opinion (Sellin and Wolfgang, 1964; Robinson and Darley, 2007; Robinson, 2012), ﬁnancial cost (DuBourg et al., 2005), and average sentence imposed (Wallace et al., 2009) are examples of the metrics in use. With the partial exception of the DuBourg et al. work, these attempts have gained little traction as a method of routinely weighting crime counts to provide a more nuanced view of crime and punishment effects. The application of the DuBourg et al. approach has been, inter alia, used to estimate the monetary cost of criminal careers (Farrington et al., 2013).

The CHI settles on the 4th metric option, arguing that it represents the reasoned assessment of the basic offence, without mitigating or aggravating

factors. The use of guideline starting points is ingenious in ensuring some stability by taking out changes in sentencing practice, at least over the short term. In the present writers’ opinion, it has the disadvantage of being removed from crime as immediately experienced, guidelines being prepared by a distinguished but remote body whose experience tends to be limited to detected crimes and whose processing progresses beyond ﬁrst tier courts. It is unnecessary here to rehearse the intrinsic criticisms made by decision theorists of the guideline approach currently promulgated in England and Wales (Hebenton et al., 2009; Dhami, 2013) but they are factors to be taken into account in the choice to devise a Harm Index using the starting points devised for such guidelines. Secondly, while the stability over time of the sentencing starting point is in principle a virtue, if it does not chime with the view of the judiciary generally, the mix of mitigating and aggravating factors which are routinely brought to bear to adjust sentence length might well mean that relative sentence lengths as promulgated in guidelines are not a reasonable reﬂection of relative harm even for the judiciary. It may well be that the presence of aggravating features in many cases means that the central tendency of sentence lengths for a particular offence departs markedly from the starting point. Finally, judgements of harm are constrained within offence categories. Insofar as the distributions of experienced harm associated with different offence categories overlap, harm as inferred from legal categorizations will be approximate at best and misleading at worst.

A surprising omission from the list of metrics listed above, is the judgement made by the immediate victim of crime. The National Crime Recording Standard, a set of rules applying throughout the England and Wales that determines whether an incident is recorded as a crime, requires that the victim account be believed unless there is credible evidence to the contrary. If the victim is to be believed in the assertion that a crime has been committed, is it too much of a stretch to say that the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

victim’s assessment of offence seriousness should inform the calculation of harm inﬂicted, in preference to judgements made as to the appropriate sentencing ‘starting point’ for the small subset of crimes reported, recorded, detected, labelled within a legal category, and processed?

We suggest that in the scaling of harm, as far as possible all crime suffered should be included, and the most salient judgements of harm should be those of the people who suffered it. This involves

- 1. Inclusion of crime which is not ofﬁcially recorded.
- 2. Inclusion of crime which is ofﬁcially recorded but where no offender is processed.
- 3. Centrality of victim judgements of the seriousness of the event unconstrained by legal category.


We argue below that data on victim judgements of offence seriousness captured by the Crime Survey for England and Wales (CSEW) provide a promising starting point for crime weighting. The people who know most about what happened in the course of an event are perpetrator and victim. The victim also, uniquely, knows about the emotional and health consequences of the event. It is contended here that victim judgements of seriousness of crime suffered, afford the best currently available variables in terms of which to weight crime counts for many purposes. A community suffers from unrecorded and unsanctioned crime as well as from crime where the perpetrator makes it to the point at which a sanction is applied. Basing harm measures exclusively on a heavily ﬁltered set of events will omit too much. That said, we acknowledge that the perfect is the enemy of the good, and that there will be instances where the use of CSEW seriousness judgements is not feasible and alternative weighting approaches represent a valuable improvement over simple counts.

Thanks to a helpful reviewer of this article who took the writers to task for a previous draft’s superﬁcial discussion of the relationship between harm, culpability, and judgements of seriousness. Our

cursory discussion of the relationships simply pointed up their complexity by reference to circumstances of contrasting levels of harm and culpability. For example, there is a wealth of legal commentary on ‘one-punch murders’ and ‘thin skull’ cases, where death would not have occurred had the victim’s skull not been fragile. Similar interpretation applies to cases where religious beliefs lead to life-saving treatment being refused, death ensuing (Klimchuk, 1998).

These are deep waters touched on superﬁcially by the second author some 40 years ago where it was argued that harm and presumed culpability fed into seriousness judgements. This, it was argued, is evident in the nonadditivity of judgements of seriousness of repeated crimes by the same perpetrator (Wagner and Pease, 1975). The reviewer has led us to undertake a simple study of the relationship between people’s judgements of the three variables: seriousness, harm, and presumed culpability; the results of which, when analysed, will be available from the ﬁrst author. Our friendly reviewer hypothesizes that the relationship will be of the form seriousness = harm culpability, we prefer to think of culpability as presumed culpability since, as the reviewer points out, culpability is inferred when an offender is not identiﬁed. For the present, we prefer

- 1. to proceed with an analysis of seriousness judgements as a weighting measure that makes sense, and
- 2. that labelling of the CHI as such makes it a misnomer given the sentencing guideline origin of its weighting variable, insofar as culpability is factored into the setting of guidelines.


The virtues of seriousness as the weighting variable of choice are as follows:

- 1. Many studies over many years have demonstrated consensus in the assessment of the relative seriousness of crimes (Rossi et al., 1974).
- 2. When offence names are presented to them without reference to what they have experienced,


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

crime victims rank crime seriousness in the abstract in more or less the same way as nonvictims, and speciﬁcally do not rank the crime(s) from which they themselves suffered more seriously than do non-victims, rather the contrary (Pease, 1988). There is thus no apparent inﬂation of seriousness judgements resulting from victimization.

- 3. Seriousness judgements made by crime victims reﬂect events more or less as they happen and in local context.
- 4. Some people and households are chronically victimized. Victim judgements allow possibly different weights to be given off to one and chronic victimizations (Shaw and Chenery, 2007). The proportion of crime (measured as counts) suffered by chronic victims has increased slightly over time (Ignatans and Pease, 2015, 2016).


For the present writers, the only obvious downside is clumsy terminology. In what follows it should be understood that where aggregate measures are reported, crime seriousness should be read as crime weighted by seriousness judgements.

A critical point noted above, is that CSEW judgements are unconstrained by offence category, whereas guideline judgements are not. If one takes the guideline approach of Sherman et al., one is limited to harm within crime categories. So, for example, all assaults occasioning actual bodily harm will be scored alike, even if harm as perceived by the victim varied widely. The CSEW ratings allow one to identify the variables associated with perceived seriousness more widely. For example, if one wished to know whether greater seriousness was associated with violence committed by people whom the victim knew well, or by co-offending groups, this would be possible with CSEW data but not by using the guideline starting point.

Many of the uses of a weighted measure correctly identiﬁed by Sherman et al. can more ﬂexibly be realized using CSEW data. An intriguing possibility is for CSEW judgements to be used to calibrate legal categories. This point will be addressed in a second paper currently in preparation.

In summary, the use of victimization surveys provides at worst a staging post towards satisfaction of the ﬁrst requirement noted above, the inclusion of unrecorded crime. The limitations of the approach include the following:

- 1. The convention of capping the number of victimizations reported (typically at ﬁve)1 understates the degree of chronic victimization (Farrell and Pease, 2007; Planty and Strom, 2007). The contribution of chronic victims to the desired weighted depiction of crime will thus be understated, unless some corrective adjustment is made. Victims of crime series pose particular problems of analysis. They are asked about the seriousness of one crime in the series. Should that be taken as implicitly a measure of the seriousness of the series as a whole, or as a number which should be multiplied by the number of events suffered? We took the latter option but analyses using the former have been carried out and are available from the corresponding author on request.
- 2. The exclusion of crime against businesses and children self-evidently distorts the picture.
- 3. ‘Victimless’ crime, such as drug use, does not feature in victimization surveys.
- 4. Novel crime types (notably cybercrime) are not yet adequately represented in crime surveys.
- 5. Murder and manslaughter victims do not contribute responses.
- 6. Much crime is not mentally labelled as such by its victims, being seen as part of the hurly-burly of


- 1 In victim forms of CSEW, every household can report up to six different victimizations, up to a maximum of ﬁve series of incidents in each.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

everyday life. Every phone call or mail purporting to come from a bank or ‘Microsoft technical support’ you have rejected or deleted is an attempt to obtain pecuniary advantage by deception. In brief, victimization surveys deal only with crime perceived as crime by its victims.

Despite their shortcomings, victimization surveys represent a way to move away from current distortions in the public representation of crime which Sherman et al. identify.

The present article has two purposes. The ﬁrst is to present weighting by seriousness as a viable alternative to the CHI and other approaches for many (not all) practical purposes. The second is to present the seriousness judgements garnered from the CSEW as an underused resource in understanding the changing scale and shape of the crime burden across people and places.

Seriousness judgements in the CSEW

Respondents to CSEW who recount crimes against them are invited to assess the seriousness of each such event (with the exception of series crimes described below) by responding to the question ‘How serious a crime do you think this was?’ and allowing a score of up to 20 to be given to every victimization incident, with the ends of the scale pegged at theft of a bottle of milk and murder. A series of crimes (deﬁned as a set of similar events probably committed by the same person) is treated differently. There details (including a seriousness judgement) are asked only about the most recent event in the series. So, if one was to report a series of burglaries, only seriousness of the latest incident would be elicited.

Seriousness judgements are expressed in the analyses below as the weighted measure of crime.

There are many ways in which the value of the weighted index may be tested. Some of the more interesting tests concern trends which cannot be identiﬁed by other means. However, in this ﬁrst outing for the approach, and after an initial examination of trends over time in counts and a weighted measure, the emphasis will be on the scale and distribution of victim-assessed seriousness and its changes across time. The data analysed here come from sweeps of the British Crime Survey (BCS) between 1994 and 2012, recently rebadged as the CSEW. Sample numbers come from the screener questions completed by all respondents. All the seriousness and offence count data used here come from Victim Forms, supplementary forms completed only by those victimized. The seriousness question is answered in virtually all Victim Forms, therefore, ﬁndings are likely to be representative of the victimized population. However, CSEW is a sample survey, so some uncertainty exists around all data points. Errors of estimation can be supplied on request. The key seriousness variable has been consistently coded in all sweeps and presents no particular methodological issues in terms of cross-sweep comparison. The seriousness question was asked of series victims only about the most recent event. One noteworthy feature of the analysis is that series events were each assigned the seriousness of the most recent event. Up to ﬁve series could be reported in the Victim Forms. Therefore, if one were to report a series of 5 burglaries and rated the latter as 10, the entire series would be weighted as having a seriousness rating of 50. Because there may in fact have been more offences in the series, total seriousness will be somewhat understated.

CSEW data used in the analyses reported here are publicly available to those wishing to replicate or extend the work.2

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- 2 http://doc.ukdataservice.ac.uk/doc/7252/mrdoc/pdf/7252_csew_2011-12_adults_dataset_user_guide.pdf


Results

a) Is the crime drop also a seriousness drop? Note

1994 1996 1998 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

Total households SCREENER

16550 16348 14947 19411 8985 32824 36479 37931

Total series harm VF

45151 38105 29225 36898 17588 52942 50956 49565

Total singles harm VF

58100 58809 43548 47861 22323 67300 69777 69139

Total series VF 7932 6431 5148 6597 2567 8170 8430 8250 Total singles VF 11322 10853 8675 9788 4097 12383 13021 12647

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Total households SCREENER

45120 47796 47203 46286 46983 44638 46754 46031

Total series harm VF

57874 61688 58730 56087 51581 51607 44812 45004

Total singles Harm VF

72153 76578 77592 69119 69652 66015 67642 63541

Total Series VF 9234 9694 9813 9181 8600 8044 7302 7366 Total Singles VF 13737 14263 14676 13116 13200 12005 12695 12301

Each year in Fig. 1 is represented by four columns. Both mean series and single crime counts have decreased by roughly 60% between 1994 and 2012 indicating a clear and consistent decrease in crime rates, based on data from the supplementary victim forms. Seriousness means, however, have decreased slightly less. The second point worthy of note in Fig. 1 is the difference between the two crime count columns. Figure 2 more clearly shows the proportion of all crime events which form part of a series. It suggests that the proportion of crimes which are series crimes forms an astonishingly high and consistent proportion of the total. It seems that around 39% of all victimizations are repeated crimes of the same type committed in the same circumstances and probably, in the victim’s view, by the same perpetrator(s). Figure 3 shows proportions of seriousness attributable to series. Around 42% of total seriousness can be attributed to series. Measuring crime trends or seriousness trends without incorporating series-event risks leads to serious misrepresentation in presenting crime problem.

b) Has the burden of seriousness shifted?

In our previous relevant work (Ignatans and Pease, 2015, 2016), the primary concern has been with the distribution of victimization across households, and the weighted measure is therefore next putto work here in establishing how the burden of crime falls across households when it is weighted by seriousness.

For the following analysis, for each survey sweep, victimized households were ranked according to the amount of crime seriousness suffered, then ranked and divided into deciles, and the proportion of each year’s total crime seriousness suffered by households in each decile calculated. The approach has similarities with previous single-year analyses (Trickett et al., 1992; Tseloni and Pease, 2005).

Figure 4 makes it clear that the mean amount of seriousness suffered by the most victimized 10% of the population has declined. In 1994, an average household in the most victimized decile suffered around 55 seriousness units (e.g. ﬁve crimes of seriousness 10 and one of seriousness 5). In 2012, this had fallen by around 10 units. The victimization peak in 2001 is likely to be an artefact of the unusually low sample used in the sweep. Figure 5 depicts the proportion of seriousness suffered by the most victimized 10% of households. This has remained roughly steady over time.

Discussion and conclusions

This article advances two distinct arguments. The ﬁrst is that seriousness judgements routinely included in the England and Wales annual national victimization survey afford a good starting point for the weighting of crime counts advocated by Sherman et al. (2014). The second is to demonstrate trends in the seriousness ‘landscape’ that have characterized the last two decades. The emerging picture is as follows:

1. Trends in crime seriousness look meaningful alongside crime counts.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- 0

- 0.5
- 1

1.5

2

- 2.5
- 3


- 3.5
- 4


Household Mean

1994

1996

1998

2000

2001

2002

Figure 1: Crimes and Seriousness 1994-2012.

2003

Series Seriousness Single Seriousness

Series Count Single Count

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

44

42

Proportion of Series Events Linear (Proportion of Series Events)

40

38

36

34

y = -0.018x + 75.252 R² = 0.0044

32

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

- Figure 2: Proportion of series events.


1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

- 2. There is a seriousness drop roughly equivalent to the crime drop.
- 3. Crime which forms part of a series represents around 39% of all crime suffered.
- 4. Crime which forms part of a series represents around 42% of all seriousness suffered.
- 5. Across the period covered, the amount of crime weighted by seriousness has become less concentrated on particular households.


6. Notwithstanding the absolute decline in harm concentration, the proportion of seriousness suffered by the most victimized decile has remained roughly stable over time.

If crime seriousness as here measured is seen to be useful as a weighting system, its scope for development is substantial, as was envisaged by Pease (1988). The sample sizes are so large, particularly summed across sweeps, that it is readily possible to

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- 40
- 41
- 42
- 43
- 44
- 45
- 46
- 47


1993

Proportion of Series Seriousness Linear (Proportion of Series Seriousness)

y = 0.0322x - 21.743 R² = 0.0096

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

- Figure 3: Proportion of series seriousness.

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Mean Crime Seriousness

Population Deciles

1994 1996 1998

- 2000

- 2001

- 2002

- 2003

- 2004

- 2005

- 2006

- 2007

- 2008

- 2009

- 2010

- 2011

- 2012


- Figure 4: Mean crime seriousness per household by decile, CSEW sweeps 1994–2012.


match, for example, by assault-caused injury to look at seriousness judgement differences by age and gender. The present writers are particularly interested in addressing the question of what the criminal law would look like if offence categorization were to be shaped by victim judgements of offence seriousness.

Not reported here are exploratory analyses showingthat offenceswithanidenticalofﬁcialoffencelabel vary widely in their judged seriousness. Factoring in attributes of events which account for some of the within ofﬁcial label variation would go some way to democratizing criminal justice, at the short-term likelihood of widespread judicial apoplexy.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

50

| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|
| | | | |
| | | | |
| | | | |
| | | | |
| | | | |
| | | | |
| | | | |
| | | | |


45

Percentage of Total Seriousness

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Population Deciles

- Figure 5: Proportion of crime seriousness per household by decile, CSEW sweeps 1994–2012.


1994 1996 1998

- 2000

- 2001

- 2002

- 2003

- 2004

- 2005

- 2006

- 2007

- 2008

- 2009

- 2010

- 2011

- 2012


A (helpful and constructive) reviewer invited us to consider how CSEW might be amended to maximize the value of weighting by using the current approach. We prefer to place the emphasis on the huge amount of helpful analysis that can be done with seriousness judgements as currently found in the survey data. Until proper and full use is made of the survey data, it is felt to be premature to suggest changes.

As for police operational implications, the work emphasizes still further the role of chronic victimization in its contribution to crime seriousness as to crime counts. It eliminates the possibility that the crime drop is an artefact of massive removal of less serious crime from consideration. It allows individual forces to examine their harm proﬁles in comparison with those of other forces.

References

Dhami, M. (2013). A Decision Science Perspective on the Old and New Sentencing Guidelines in England and Wales. In Ashworth, A. and Roberts, J. (eds), Sentencing Guidelines. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

DuBourg, R., Hamed, J., and Thorns, J. (2005). The economic and social costs of crime against individuals and

households 2003/04. Online Report No. 30/05. London: Home Ofﬁce.

Farrell, G. and Pease, K. (2007). The Sting in the Tail of the British Crime Survey: Multiple Victimisations. In Hough, M. and Maxﬁeld, M. (eds), Surveying Crime in the 21st Century. Cullompton: Willan.

Farrington, D. P., Piquero, A. R., and Jennings, W. G. (2013). Offending from Childhood to Late Middle Age: Recent Results from the Cambridge Study in Delinquent Development. New York: Springer.

Hebenton, B., Shaw, D., and Pease, K. (2009). ‘Offences Involving Indecent Photographs and Pseudo-Photographs of Children: An Analysis of Sentencing Guidelines.’ Psychology, Crime & Law 15: 425–40.

- Ignatans, D. and Pease, K. (2015). Distributive Justice and the Crime Drop. In Andresen, M. and Farrell, G. (eds), The Offending Act: Festschrift for Marcus Felson. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Ignatans, D. and Pease, K. (2016a). ‘On Whom Does the Burden of Crime Fall Now? Changes Over Time in Counts and Concentration.’ International Review of Victimology. Advanced Access published November 3, 2015: 10.1177/0269758015610854.


Ignatans, D. and Pease, K. (2016b). ‘The Global Crime Drop and Changes in the Distribution of Victimisation.’ International Review of Victimology. In press.

Klimchuk, D. (1998). ‘Causation, Thin Skulls and Equality.’ Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence 11: 115–40.

Neyroud, P. (2015). ‘Evidence-Based Triage in Prosecuting Arrestees: Testing and Actuarial System of Selective Targeting.’ International Criminal Justice Review 25: 117–31.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Pease, K. (1988). Judgements of Offence Seriousness: Findings from the 1984 British Crime Survey. London: Home Ofﬁce.

Pease, K. (2008). The Home Ofﬁce and the Police: The Case of the Police Funding Formula. In Harﬁeld, C. et al (ed.), The Handbook of Intelligent Policing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Pease, K., Ireson, J., and Thorpe, J. (1974). ‘Additivity Assumptions in the Measurements of Delinquency.’ British Journal of Criminology 14: 256–63.

Pease, K., Billingham, S., and Earnshaw, I. (1977). Community Service Assessed in 1976. Home Ofﬁce Research Study 29. London: HMSO.

Planty, M. and Strom, K. J. (2007). ‘Understanding the Role of Repeat Victims in the Production of Annual Victimisation Rates.’ Journal of Quantitative Criminology 23: 179–200.

Robinson, P. H. (2012). Criminalisation Tensions: Empirical Desert, Changing Norms, and Rape Reform. In Duff, R. A., Farmer, L., Marshall, S. E. and Tadros, V. (eds), The Structure of the Criminal Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Robinson, P. H. and Darley, J. M. (2007). ‘Intuitions of Justice: Implications for Criminal Law and Justice Policy.’ Southern California Review 81: 1–67.

Rossi, P. H., Waite, E., Bose, C. E., and Berk, R. E. (1974). ‘The Seriousness of Crimes: Normative Structure and

Individual Differences.’ American Sociological Review 39: 224 37.

Sellin, T. and Wolfgang, M. (1964). The Measurement of Delinquency. Oxford: Wiley.

Shaw, M. and Chenery, S. (2007). Kings and Castles, Caves and Cavemen: The Impact of Crime on Men. In Farrell, G., Bowers, K., Johnson, S., and Townsley, M. (eds), Imagination For Crime Prevention. Crime Prevention Studies, vol. 21. New York: Criminal Justice Press.

Sherman, L. W., Neyroud, P. W., and Neyroud, E. C. (2014). The Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI) Measuring Total Harm from Crime Based on Sentencing Guidelines, Version 2.0. University of Cambridge.

Trickett, A., Osborn, D., Seymour, J., and Pease, K. (1992). ‘What is Different about High Crime Areas?.’ British Journal of Criminology 32: 81–89.

Tseloni, A. and Pease, K. (2005). ‘Population Inequality: The Case of Repeat Victimisation.’ International Review of Victimology 12: 75–90.

Wallace, M., Turner, K., Matarazzo, A., and Babyak, C. (2009). Measuring Crime in Canada: Introducing the Crime Severity Index and Improvements to the Uniform Crime Reporting Survey. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/10/3/184/1752860 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

