455

|Article|
|---|


# The New Zealand Crime Harm Index: Quantifying Harm Using Sentencing Data

## Sophie Curtis-Ham and Darren Walton

Abstract This article describes the development of the New Zealand Crime Harm Index (NZ CHI), a measure of relative harm from crime which is designed to enable targeting of limited police resource for the greatest impact on harm and measurement of these impacts. The NZ CHI uses an alternative approach to existing Crime Harms Indices developed overseas, by estimating the minimum sentence for a ﬁrst-time offender using actual sentencing data. The methodology used to develop the NZ CHI is described, along with results of its application to crime data, comparison with other approaches such as the Cambridge Crime Harm Index, and assessment of the NZ CHI against speciﬁed criteria. The NZ CHI method may be of use to other jurisdictions developing Crime Harm Indices, and provides beneﬁts over sentencing guideline-based approaches in terms of the speciﬁcity of crime categories to which harm weights can be applied.

Introduction

With evidence-based policing increasingly at the forefront of both operational and academic policing discourse, it is timely to consider how best to measure crime in developing an evidence base for ‘what works’ in preventing or reducing crime and its impacts on society. As Neyroud (2016a) points out, the rise of harm-focused policing in recent years, concurrent with the evidence-based approach, provides just such an opportunity to reﬁne our measurement of crime with a focus not only on crime volume but also on harm. The result has been the development of Crime Harm Indices in several jurisdictions which quantify crime harm (e.g. Ignatans and Pease, 2015; Ratcliffe, 2015a;

Sherman et al., 2016). This article describes the New Zealand’s Crime Harm Index (NZ CHI), which may also be relevant in other jurisdictions. We ﬁrst set out the international and local context in which the NZ CHI was developed, including its purpose and the criteria by which a CHI may be assessed.

What is a CHI?

As Ratcliffe (2015b) points out, ‘Harm is an amorphous term that is easily understood in the abstract but vague in a policy context’ (p. 3), with the beneﬁt that this lack of deﬁnitional clarity prevents narrow interpretation. We take a similarly broad view of harm to include the various negative

Senior Research and Evaluation Advisor, New Zealand Police, Wellington, 6011, New Zealand. E-mail: sophie.curtisham@police.govt.nz

Director, Research and Evaluation, New Zealand Police, Wellington, 6011, New Zealand; Adjunct Associate Professor of Psychology, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand

Advance Access publication: 23 August 2017 Policing, Volume 12, Number 4, pp. 455–467 doi:10.1093/police/pax050

The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

physical, psychological, social, and economic impacts caused by crime as a whole and speciﬁc crimes relative to each other. ‘Harm’ herein refers to crime harm and is distinguished from the concepts of crime seriousness or severity which incorporate both harm of the offence and culpability of the offender (Andersson, 2003; Ignatans and Pease, 2015; Law Commission, 2013; Ministry of Justice (MOJ), 2017; cf. Ofﬁce for National Statistics (ONS), 2016), and indices or scales which measure seriousness or severity (e.g. Babyak et al., 2009; MOJ, 2017).

A CHI is a score derived from the application of a metric which weights each crime based on a proxy measure of the harm it causes, comparative to other crimes. A CHI allows weighted crimes to be aggregated into an overall measure of harm, as opposed to traditional measures of crime volume where all crimes are counted equally.

Why develop a CHI?

The recent development of crime harm metrics in other jurisdictions has in part been driven by a broader shift in focus towards crime harm. As Sherman et al. (2016) describe, this stems from ongoing pursuit for better ways of reﬂecting the harm experienced by victims of crime, operational considerations forcing police agencies to seek new ways of prioritizing increasingly limited resource, and renewed emphasis on harm reduction as a primary policing objective. In New Zealand, reducing harm is an expressly stated goal of the country’s sole Police force (NZ Police, 2016a, 2016b; see also Pol, 2016). This focus on crime harm necessitates the development of metrics with which to quantify and measure it to better understand, respond and assess the impact of responses. Using a CHI, therefore, enables agencies to better reﬂect, and promote focus on, organizational and sector wide goals of harm reduction by more directly measuring these outcomes.

At a more operational level, a CHI enables the identiﬁcation of high harm populations and locations to inform the targeting of resource (Sherman, 2013). There is evidence that harm concentrates to

a greater extent than volume (i.e. smaller proportions of victims/offenders/locations are responsible for higher proportions of harm), suggesting opportunities for greater impact using less resource than a traditional volume-focused deployment model. For example, analysis using the Cambridge CHI in one UK county found 1.7% of the 24,311 couples who were the subjects of 36,742 callouts for domestic abuse over 5years generated 80% of total crime harm (Bland and Ariel, 2015). Using seriousness scores from victim surveys, Ignatans and Pease (2015) also found that serial/repeat offending accounted for a higher proportion of total seriousness than total volume of victimizations in the UK. Similarly, Ratcliffe (2015b) presents analysis from Philadelphia where CHI weightings were applied to each offence committed by an offender and combined into an aggregate harm score. This identiﬁed offenders whose cumulative harm was more destructive to the community than offenders who might be targeted from a focus on either violent or volume crime alone. Comparing traditional hotspots of violence with harm-weighted hotspots in the city of Wilmington, DE, Ratcliffe (2015b) identiﬁed a geographic area that experienced signiﬁcant harm from crime but was less likely to have received attention using the traditional method. Weinborn et al. (2017) provide further evidence of the greater concentration of harm than volume, geographically, comparing such ‘harmspots’ and unweighted hotspots (see also Neyroud, 2016b).

Relatedly, a CHI can be used for performance measurement and monitoring of change in harm over time and across different administrative units. Ratcliffe (2015b), for example, highlights differences in harm proﬁles between different police districts in Philadelphia and changes in total harm and harm proﬁles over time. Likewise, CHI-based performance measurement comparing harm distribution to actual policing activity could promote accountability. For example, showing the ratio between the CHI distribution across the force area and the patrol distribution (based on GPS monitors in radios or cars) could ensure stafﬁng levels,

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

rosters, and deployments match high harm places and periods (Sherman, 2013; Sherman et al., 2016).

Additionally, a CHI facilitates the incorporation of harm into risk assessment and triaging decisions. For example, individual offenders’ CHI can be used to inform decisions as to how to proceed (e.g. in or out of court, or assignment to speciﬁc diversionary interventions) dependent on their potential to cause further harm (Neyroud, 2016a, 2016b; Sherman, 2013). As Amoah-Ntim (2011) summarizes, by forecasting the harm individual offenders are likely to cause instead of counting speciﬁc offences, authorities could identify the ‘high-frequency, high-harm’ offenders and conﬁne this high-risk group, while managing the lower-risk population in non-custodial settings.

CHI-based measures can further be used to provide more nuanced evaluation of interventions. Recent studies have used the Cambridge CHI in comparing crime harm per offender before and after police or other agency intervention (Sherman et al., 2016; Neyroud, 2016a). In a similar vein, the New Zealand Ministry of Social Development use crime seriousness scores (based on average sentences delivered by the courts) to check whether the seriousness of youth re-offending reduces after interventions (MOJ, 2017).

Lastly, CHIs have a role to play in contributing to wider criminological and policing research. As Pol (2016) suggests, and Ignatans and Pease (2015) exemplify, a CHI could provide a more nuanced measure of crime which may help explain trends such as the ‘crime drop’ seen in many countries over recent decades.

What does a good CHI look like?

While jurisdictions will naturally vary due to differences in deﬁnitions of crime and sentencing practice, the literature on CHIs provide broad guidance for their development. Sherman et al. (2016) state three explicit criteria which they consider a CHI metric must meet:

- 1. Democratic: Reﬂects the resolution of conﬂicting viewpoints by a process adopted by a democratic government reﬂecting the will of the people. Ratcliffe (2015a) likewise proposes that a CHI metric should not originate with the police for purposes of transparency.
- 2. Reliable: Can be consistentlyapplied toeachunit of analysis—time, place, people—with the same results for the same levels of harm, and reliable from year-to-year, without being inﬂuenced by changes in sentencing trends or offender demographics.
- 3. Inexpensive: Can be adopted without additional funding (e.g. by using existing publicly available data).

The following implicit, but related, criteria can be added:

- 4. Valid: The metric needs to measure harm simply and objectively, in the sense that the harm value must be associated solely with the offence type, without adjustment for prior criminal history, other offender attributes (e.g. remorse, degree of culpability) or the circumstances of the particular offence (either aggravating or mitigating). Validity also means being as speciﬁc as possible in relation to particular crimes, rather than basing harm weights on broad categories of crime which encompass a range of less to more serious offences (see also Ratcliffe, 2015a).
- 5. Easily operationalized: Not too complex to understand, and able to be applied in practice with minimal instruction or training (see also Pol, 2016).


Sherman et al. (2016) and Ratcliffe (2015a) provide contemporary summaries and assessments of the different approaches to measuring harm to date. These include taxonomies of harm, court records of actual sentences, surveys of victims or the public, cost-of-crime estimates and minimum sentencing guidelines and tariffs. Sherman et al. (2016) adopt the tariff approach for England and Wales as best meeting the criteria for a good CHI, basing their

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Cambridge CHI on the minimum tariff for a ﬁrsttime offender set out by the Sentencing Guidelines for England and Wales. A similar approach is taken by Ratcliffe (2015a) in the USA, using gravity scores set out in non-mandatory guidelines to assist judges in determining the appropriate penalty.

An alternative CHI based on sentencing data

Accepting that a minimum sentence approach is the best ﬁt to the CHI criteria, what should a jurisdiction do if it has no comprehensive regulatory or statutory guidelines for sentence starting points or tariffs? In New Zealand, there are neither starting tariffs nor ranges set out in any comprehensive set of guidelines or regulations.1 A handful of sentencing guideline or ‘tariff’ judgments have been issued by the NZ Court of Appeal but these only exist for a small range of serious offences, insufﬁcient for incorporation into a comprehensive CHI, and are the result of decisionmaking based on exceptional cases by unelected judges rather than a democratic process (see Law Commission, 2006; Mallett, 2014).

This article outlines the methodology used to develop a CHI for New Zealand using sentencing data from the courts, and presents the results of initial analysis conducted to test and validate the CHI, along with an assessment with reference to the criteria set out above. It contributes to the growing literature and debate on the measurement of crime harm and provides an alternative method for the development of CHIs in other jurisdictions which do not have minimum sentencing tariffs.

### Method

Overall approach

The overarching approach to develop the CHI was to replicate closely the UK’s Cambridge CHI

(Sherman et al., 2016). As mentioned, an exact replication was not possible as New Zealand does not have sentencing guidelines so the CHI was based on actual sentences delivered by the Courts converted as best as possible to an equivalent to the starting point for a ﬁrst offender for any given offence. We also followed the Cambridge CHI approach in translating noncustodial sentences into an equivalent number of days in prison, and converting custodial sentences into the time served in prison before release (e.g. on parole), rather than using the full sentence length.

However, where the Cambridge CHI translates custodial sentences into the minimum time to serve in prison before being eligible for potential release (e.g. on parole), we used the average time actually served, for several reasons. First, to maintain proportionality between short (2 years or less) and long (more than 2 years) sentences. These are treated differently in NZ legislation, resulting in the anomaly that an offender could serve the same minimum time for a 3-year sentence (if paroled on the earliest possible date at one-third of the sentence) as a 2-year sentence (released at half of the sentence).2 Secondly, to ensure that the translation of Home Detention sentences into equivalent prison days was commensurate with the equivalence found in sentencing practice, which equates one year of Home Detention with two years’ imprisonment, which is 1 year of actual time served in prison (Goodall and Durrant, 2013; Goodall, 2014). Thirdly, to reﬂect the fact that offenders sentenced to long sentences typically serve much longer than a third of their sentence (Department of Corrections, 2016, personal communication). Using the average proportion of the full sentence served thus enabled a more accurate

- 1 While there exists legislation to bring a Sentencing Council into being which would provide such Sentencing Guidelines, this legislation languishes on the statute books without being brought into force by Order in Council and the current National Government has announced that it does not intend to proceed with the Sentencing Council (Law Commission, 2013; Parliamentary Counsel Ofﬁce, 2016).
- 2 Parole Act 2002 and Sentencing Act 2002.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

calculation of minimum time spent in prison than using release eligibility.3

A further diversion from the Cambridge CHI as presented in Sherman et al. (2016) involved calculating CHI weights for all available offence codes rather than limiting to offence categories usually reported to (rather than proactively discovered by) police. CHI users can then consider whether to exclude ‘proactively identiﬁed’ offences, dependent on the needs of the analysis.

CHI development process

CHI weights were derived from a sentencing data set provided by the Ministry of Justice containing the outcomes of charges for the period 2004–15 inclusive. Relevant outcomes and sentences were translated into ‘Equivalent Prison Days’ (EPD) using the formula set out in Table 1. Only charges which were proven in court and dealt with by way of sentencing were included. This excluded charges not proven in court (e.g. acquittals, withdrawals, dismissals, pre-trial diversion) and charges proven but resulting in no sentence (e.g. discharged, admonishment, to come up for sentence if called upon, and psychiatric committal) as these were considered to be more offender- rather than harm-related outcomes. Sentences and orders which were more reﬂective of offender circumstances and needs than the harm of the offence were also excluded from the analysis as more error prone than helpful in isolating harm (i.e. containing more ‘noise’ than ‘signal’—Silver,

- 2012). These included Intensive Supervision, Supervision, rehabilitative programmes, driving/licence restrictions and secure treatment. The inclusion of the selected non-imprisonment sentences thus balanced minimizing sampling bias (an issue with other indices based on prison-only sentences—Babyak et al., 2009) with reducing error.


Where the charge resulted in multiple sentences, only the most serious sentence was used. Charges relating to corporations rather than individuals were excluded as likely to overinﬂate CHI values for offences which resulted in large ﬁnes of corporate entities.

For each offence code where there were at least ﬁve eligible charges between 2011 and 2015 (or 2004–15 for codes where there were<5 for 2011–15), the 15th percentile along the distribution of EPDs was taken as the CHI weighting. A threshold of 5 was set based on precedent from Canada (Babyak et al., 2009), in order to maximize the number of offence codes with sufﬁcient charges to generate a 15th percentile and minimize the number of charges where imputation was necessary. The 15th (or 85th) percentile is widely used in the transport domain as a cut-off point to inform speed limits and trafﬁc signal timing (Hou et al., 2012). This point in the distribution was chosen as most likely toreﬂect the starting point sentence for a ﬁrst offender, being at the lower end of the distribution and removing the inﬂuence of extreme outliers at either end of the distribution.

For some codes, there were fewer than ﬁve charges with calculable EPDs to generate a 15th percentile, requiring imputation from similar offences. Offence codes used by the New Zealand Police fall into a hierarchy whereby a four-digit code represents the most speciﬁc level of describing the offence and the ﬁrst, second, and third digits serve to group similar offences together. Several examples are presented in Table 2 for illustrative purposes. Codes with n<5 were grouped with other codes in the same Type grouping and given the 15th percentile of that group’s total EPDs between 2011 and 2015, or between 2004 and 2015 if necessary, to yield a group with n 5. If n<5 for the Type grouping, the Class was used, followed by the

- 3 We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising the issue that time spent on remand affects time served and, in some jurisdictions, the length of the sentence itself. In New Zealand remand is not a factor in setting sentence length and sentence start dates are effectively backdated to incorporate time on remand in custody (Section 90 of Parole Act 2002), such that remand time counts in the same way as non-remand time served. Others wishing to apply our methodology may need to take additional steps to account for the inﬂuence of time on remand in their jurisdiction.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- Table 1: Conversion of sentences to EPD

Sentence EPD formula Rationale Community work = sentence length in

hours/8

Number of days it would take to complete the sentence based on an 8h work day (as per Cambridge CHI). Fine = ﬁne $/(15.25 8) Number of days it would take to pay off the ﬁne based on an

8h work day at minimum wage (as per Cambridge CHI). Community detention = sentence length in

days/2

Most CD sentences involve residential restrictions of 12h per day, such that the offender is detained for half the length of the sentence.

Home detention = sentence length in days

The number of days spent detained.

Determinate period of imprisonment (cumulative or concurrent)a 2years

= sentence length in days/2

The number of days before mandatory release having served half the sentence (Sentencing Act 2002).

Determinate period of imprisonment (cumulative or concurrent) > 2years

= sentence length in days 0.74

The number of days before release, based on average portion of sentence served for all ﬁrst releases from sentences for the ﬁnancial years 2012/13, 2013/14, 2014/15 and 2015/16 (Department of Corrections, 2016, personal communication).

Life imprisonment = 5,337 The number of days before release, based on average length of sentence served for all ﬁrst releases from life sentences occurring in the ﬁnancial years 2012/13 and 2015/16 (Department of Corrections, 2016, personal communication). A similar approach is used by ONS (2016) in developing Crime Severity Scores for UK.

Preventive Detention = 5,182 As above. Offence code EPD Formula Rationale Trafﬁc offence codes

with set infringement fees

= fee $/(15.25 8) Regardless of actual sentence, the minimum penalty for these offences are the set fees, so for these codes the fee was used instead of a 15th percentile. Formula is the same as for ﬁnes to convert $ into EPD.

aSection 84 of the Sentencing Act 2002 allows for the imposition of sentences of imprisonment either cumulatively or concurrently. To the extent that concurrent sentences may reﬂect the total sentence for all charges sentenced at the same time taking all charges into account, which is then applied to each charge, concurrent sentences may overestimate the harm from each charge alone. This overestimation would not be an issue in terms of capturing relative harm if the rate of concurrent sentencing was equal across all offences, but Department of Corrections analysts familiar with the sentencing data and trends conﬁrmed that some offences were more likely to receive concurrent sentences than others. Ultimately this margin of error was accepted due to the impracticality and complexity involved in treating concurrent and cumulative sentences differently.

- Table 2: Offence code hierarchy examples Category Class Type Offence code


- 1000 Violence 1100 Homicide 1110 Murder 1111 Murders (ﬁrearm)
- 1000 Violence 1100 Homicide 1110 Murder 1112 Murders (other weapon)
- 1000 Violence 1100 Homicide 1110 Murder 1113 Murders (manually)


- 4000 Dishonesty 4100 Burglary 4120 Burglary (other property) 4121 Burgles (other property)(over $5000) by day
- 4000 Dishonesty 4100 Burglary 4120 Burglary (other property) 4122 Burgles (other property) ($500–$5000) by day
- 4000 Dishonesty 4100 Burglary 4120 Burglary (other property) 4123 Burgles (other property)(under $500) by day


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- Figure 1: Distribution of CHI weights by ANZSOC crime division.


Category where necessary for a very small number of remaining codes.

Testing and validation procedure

To provide an initial indication as to the validity of the CHI, several comparative analyses were conducted. The CHI weights based on the 15th percentile were compared with alternative percentiles, offence Seriousness Scores developed by the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) (2017) and legislated maximum sentences. The Seriousness Scores follow a similar methodology to the CHI but do not incorporate Community Detention sentences and are based on the mean rather than 15th percentile of the sentence distribution. Bivariate correlations were used to determine the closeness of the association between the CHI and these comparison measures. Comparisons were also made on the number of discrete rankings each measure yielded (i.e. degree of differentiation between individual offence codes). We further compared the CHI with the Cambridge CHI values. While Cambridge CHI values are now available for upwards of 400 speciﬁc

offences (Weinborn et al., 2017) it was not possible to map these speciﬁc offences across one to one between the two jurisdictions due to differences in offence deﬁnitions at that level of speciﬁcity. However, comparison was enabled by grouping the NZ offence codes into the Cambridge CHI crime categories presented by Sherman et al. (2016) and taking the average weight for all the offence codes within each crime category.

### Results and discussion

In this section, we present and discuss the results of descriptive analysis of the CHI distribution, the testing and validation analysis, and assessment of the CHI against the criteria set out earlier. This is followed by a wider discussion of the implications and opportunities arising from this research.

CHI distribution

Figure 1 shows the distribution of 6,412 CHI weights grouped by the common crime categorization system applied across Australasia (ANZSOC4).

- 4 Australia and New Zealand Standard Offence Classiﬁcation.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- Figure 2: Crime in New Zealand 2015 by crime harm and volume.


This system is used for reporting of ofﬁcial statistics by the New Zealand police and its highest level of aggregation (called Divisions) provides greater descriptive detail that the 1000, 2000, etc. Categories described above. The relative order of CHI distributions, with homicide and rape, for example, having the highest median weights, and public order and miscellaneous offences the lowest, aligns approximately with the ordering of the ANZSOC Divisions from serious to minor offences (numbered 01–16), and appears to make intuitive sense. The degree of variance within the Divisions, however, is striking, highlighting the lack of sensitivity inherent in using broad aggregations to reﬂect relative harm, and the advantage of distinguishing between offences at a much more disaggregated level.

Figure 2 displays the results of applying the CHI weights to selected categories of offence data5 for the calendar year 2015 (left) by comparison to volume alone (right). Sexual offences immediately stand out as presenting much higher harm (30%) than indicated by volume (1%), and the harm approach de-emphasizes the relative proportion of theft and related offences (e.g. receiving stolen goods), comprising 18% of harm versus 44% of volume.

Testing and validation results

Comparison of the CHI with alternative percentiles, seriousness scores and maximum sentences is presented in Table 3. The CHI correlated highly with alternative percentiles and measures of central tendency (r = 0.87–0.97) and the MOJ Seriousness Score (0.77), and moderately with the legislated maxima (0.47). One potential limitation is that it yielded fewer discrete ranks than the Seriousness Score (itself based on average sentences), a result of many codes sharing the same minimum fee and the imputation process. The CHI proﬁle of harm was more evenly spread across offence categories than ‘raw’ volume and the alternative measures, which were weighted more towards dishonesty. For example, dishonesty offences accounted for 67% of volume, 39% of CHI harm, and 63% of harm using the Seriousness Score.

Table 4 presents the results of comparison with Cambridge CHI values presented in Sherman et al. (2016). There is broad consistency in the ranking of different crime types, if not in the absolute values. Our use of average not minimum time spent in prison may explain the higher values of our CHI for the lower level offences towards the bottom of the table. Differences in sentencing law and

- 5 Categories of crime usually detected by police activity rather than reported by the public excluded (e.g. drugs, trafﬁc offences). Offence data were extracted using SAS-Visual Analytics from a data warehouse (Police Insights Central) which combines offence data from the National Intelligence Application (NIA) and CARD (Communication and Resource Deployment) and consisted of a count of offences per year (based on date of occurrence, not reporting) per offence code.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- Table 3: Comparison of CHI with alternative metrics


N ranks Percentage of harm per group of ANZSOC Divisionsa

Measure Correlation (r)

N for correlation

Violence (01,02,04,05,06) (%)

Sexual

Dishonesty (07,08,09) (%)

Property damage (12) (%)

(03) (%)

NZ CHI - - 596 26 30 39 6 5th percentileb 0.97 1281 548 17 33 43 6 25th percentileb 0.98 1281 336 28 23 44 5 Medianb 0.88 1281 271 20 17 59 4 Meanb 0.87 1281 1214 19 12 64 5 Maximum penaltyc 0.47 5118 59 18 4 72 6 MOJ Seriousness Score 0.77 6274 3609 20 14 63 3 Crime volume (unweighted) - - - 20 1 67 11

aBased on same offence data and method as for Figure 1 above. bBased only on offence codes for which the CHI was derived from the 15th percentile of the distribution for that code, not a minimum fee or imputed 15th percentile from code grouping.

cFull sentence length of legislated maximum penalty. Fines only used where there was no maximum imprisonment term and converted into days taken to pay the ﬁne off at minimum wage. Data were provided by the Ministry of Justice. Life imprisonment was recorded as 99 years in the data set and this was left unchanged in the analysis.

Table 4: Comparison of Cambridge CHI and NZ CHI weights

UK crime type Cambridge CHI NZ CHI Mean NZ CHI Minimum NZ CHI Maximum Cambridge CHI rank NZ CHI rank

Homicide 5,475 1629 95.9 5337 1 1 Rape 1,825 1172 584.6 1971 2 2 GBH 1,460 425 36.1 1073 3 4 Sexual assault 365 481 12.5 1897 4 3 Robbery 365 155 18.2 742 4 5 Arson 33 110 60.0 203 6 6 Actual bodily harm 20 108 12.5 286 7 7 Burglary 20 63 7.5 588 7 8 Fraud 20 48 0.3 1484 7 9 Theft of vehicle 20 12 2.1 32 7 13 Theft from person 20 10 6.3 17 7 16 Criminal damage (other) 2 45 0.3 1080 12 10 Theft (other) 2 29 5.0 1080 12 11 Theft from vehicle 2 11 9.4 15 12 14 Theft from shop 2 10 5.0 15 12 15 Assault 1 13 2.1 90 16 12

attitudes towards particular offences reﬂected in sentencing guidelines versus sentencing practice are also factors that may account for differences between the NZ and Cambridge CHIs. The minima and maxima again highlight the degree of variance within crime categories, and the beneﬁt approaches which provide CHI weights at an offence speciﬁc level.

Assessment against CHI criteria

Democratic. The lack of sentencing guidelines in New Zealand necessarily meant the CHI could not be based on minimum sentences set out via a process of democratic government. However, to the extent that sentences handed down by judges are guided by sentencing legislation passed by parliament, the sentences are

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

arguably a product, albeit indirectly, of democratic process. That variation in sentencing exists between judges (Law Commission, 2006; Goodall and Durrant, 2013; Mallett, 2014) also

- means that using their sentences takes into account their varying viewpoints which (1) reﬂect the variation within society as a whole on the relative harmfulness of offences (Law Commission,


- 2013), and (2) would have informed the development sentencing guidelines had these proceeded following the 2007 legislation.


Reliable. The CHI can be applied to any unit of analysis by which offences are aggregated, enabling reliable comparison of harm across those units (e.g. people, places, and time periods). The use of the 15th percentile makes the CHI less sensitive to variation in individual judgments and therefore a more reliable indicator of harm compared with other measures of distribution. This percentile was also chosen in order to reduce the inﬂuence of offender-related variables, arguably making the CHI less sensitive to changes in offender demographics over time. Using 5–10 years of sentencing data additionally reduced the CHI’s sensitivity to short-to-medium term changes in sentencing trends, and it could be argued that longer term sentencing trends should be reﬂected in the CHI

- as these would be indicative of changes in societal conceptions of the harm caused by particular types of offences.


Inexpensive. While developing the CHI methodology and algorithm required signiﬁcant initial time investment, this was achieved within approximately 6months by existing Police research staff without any additional funding and the R code can now be applied to any updated sentencing data set to generate the CHI within a matter of minutes (with some additional Excel formatting of the output). The sentencing data itself was

extracted easily and quickly from a national database, once appropriate data-sharing protocols were set up between the Ministry of Justice and NZ Police. An acknowledged limitation is that the sentencing data is not itself in the public domain, however, the CHI will be freely available to external parties wishing to apply it in their work.

Valid. The foregoing analysis lends support to the validity of the CHI based on the 15th percentile in measuring harm rather than extraneous factors. Further validation studies are required to empirically validate the CHI’s estimation relative to perceived harm derived by measuring the views of the public. For example, it would be possible to compare the CHI with offence seriousness scores provided by respondents to the New Zealand Crime and Safety Survey (NZCASS, equivalent to the Crime Survey for England and Wales, as used by Ignatans and Pease, 2015).

With regard to speciﬁcity, by producing CHI weights at the highly granular offence code level, our methodology advances on previous approaches constrained to broad crime categories (Ignatans and Pease, 2015; Sherman et al., 2016), more accurately reﬂecting the range of harm levels within aggregate categories. This progress is in line with the development of the Cambridge CHI to extend to a wider range of more speciﬁc offences (Weinborn et al., 2017) and sentencing data-based seriousness indices (Babyak et al., 2009; MOJ, 2017). Over 6,000 CHI weights were calculated, for 97%6 of offence codes in the NZ justice system, and including historical codes no longer applied to current offences but enabling CHI-based analysis of historical offences.

In limiting the CHI weights to offence codes, however, the CHI fails to capture other harms which are associated with demand for police service (e.g. non-crime incidents) or even a product

- 6 CHI values were not derived for 221 minor trafﬁc infringement codes due to there being no sentencing data and no minimum fees listed in the source data for these codes.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

thereof (e.g. investigative stops causing tension between police and the community and undermining trust and conﬁdence in the police). This is a limitation which has been raised in relation to CHIs elsewhere (Sherman et al., 2016; Hales and Higgins, 2016). While Ratcliffe (2015a) incorporates police stops in his harm index, he also concedes the arbitrariness of the weighting and lack of appropriate proportionality to homicide (a ratio of 60:1). The incorporation of non-crime measures of harm in developing crime harm indices is an area where further research is needed.

A related validity issue is that CHIs based on jurisdiction-level sentencing (be it guidelines or practice) generalize harm across socio-demographic or geographic subgroups which may suffer different levels of harm from the same crime. As Innes (2014) argues, communities experience harm from crime, and lower level disorder, differentially. Offences and incidents may ‘signal’ harm felt by a community (e.g. negative feelings, thoughts, and behavioural changes) beyond their direct impacts on the immediate victim, and these signals and their effects can vary from community to community (Innes, 2014). CHI-based measurement of harm at a subgroup level may therefore under- or over-estimate harm speciﬁc to a given group and would need to be caveated accordingly. Identifying and incorporating this variation into crime harm indices provides an additional avenue for future research.

Easily operationalized. The CHI is a simple lookup table listing the offences codes and their weightings, which can be applied to any data set containing the offences codes at either unit record or aggregate level. A user guide is provided alongside the CHI weights which provides an explanation of the methodology and instructions as to how to apply the CHI weights to data, along with some illustrative examples.

Additional considerations and opportunities

A key difference between our CHI and the Cambridge CHI presented in Sherman et al. (2016) is our inclusion of all trafﬁc and non-trafﬁc offence codes, without exclusion of particular categories of offences which tend to be proactively identiﬁed by police rather than reported by the public. While we agree with Sherman et al. (2016) that including such proactively detected offences can present a misleading picture as to the actual rate at which such offences occur, this is equally a consideration when measuring crime by volume as by harm. To that end, it is for users of the CHI to consider the appropriate subset of offence categories to include for any given piece of research or analysis, which will be in turn dictated by their speciﬁc research question (cf Sweeten, 2012).

A related issue is that just as volume-based analysis of police data on recorded crime fails to capture unreported offending, so too does harmweighted analysis of this same data. Moreover, as Hales and Higgins (2016) point out, high harm offences such as sexual assault and domestic violence typically have lower reporting rates, so the underestimation of harm from these offences is ampliﬁed. By way of solution, in the same way that crime and victimization surveys are an essential complement to police data in understanding the true prevalence of offending in the community, CHI weights could be applied to survey data to enhance understanding of the true rate of harm.

In what might be seen as a risk to the collective validity of CHIs internationally, adding another methodology serves to generate further international inconsistency in absolute harm values and ratios between offences. Ratcliffe (2015a) notes that existing harm, severity and cost of crime metrics differ considerably across jurisdictions, for example, with ratios ranging from 2 to 12 to 128 robberies to one homicide based on the Pennsylvania Offense Gravity Score, the Canadian

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Crime Severity Index (Babyak et al., 2009), and USA cost of crime estimates (Heaton, 2010), respectively. To this we can add the Cambridge CHI

- at 15:1 and the NZ CHI at 12:1, with their broad consistency likely due to their common approach of expressing relative harm in terms of time spent in prison. Future research could explore these variations further. For example, it would be informative to apply our methodology to UK sentencing data to establish whether the Cambridge CHI/ NZ CHI differences were methodological or jurisprudential.


In an alternative take on the ‘democracy’ criteria, Ignatans and Pease (2015) argue that CHIs should derive from the views of the victims who have experienced it, rather than a more removed judicial, legislative, or public body. While there is an opportunity to cross-validate the CHI with seriousness ratings from existing NZCASS victim survey data, using this data itself to form the CHI would have

- meant limiting the number and speciﬁcity of offence types, thus undermining its validity and a key beneﬁt of our approach. These ratings (on an ordinal scale of 1–20) are also potentially not the best way for victims to express their views of relative harm, being prone to cognitive bias of anchoring and adjustment on numeric scales (Epley and Gilovich, 2006; Gehlbach and Barge, 2012) and exhibiting wide variation in seriousness ratings for the same offence (Ignatans and Pease, 2015). The New Zealand Law Commission (2013) similarly found wide variation in seriousness rankings in a public consultation pilot involving a small subset of offences. A variety of other survey methodologies, such as using sophisticated rank order or pairwise comparisons, have been suggested as ways of measuring public views of relative harm (Pol, 2016 and Sweeten, 2012). Developing and implementing such a bespoke alternative would come at the cost of the ‘cost’ criteria and be unlikely to achieve the granularity of the thousands of offence codes for which harm weights have been identiﬁed using the present sentencing data-based approach. While thus limited as an alternative approach to


developing a CHI, such public survey methods, involving as disaggregated offence descriptions as possible, would still offer validation opportunities.

Conclusion

The development of a reliable, valid and easily operationalized crime harm metric is integral to achieving the goals of harm focused and evidencebased policing (Pol, 2016; Sherman, 2013). Our early results and initial validation testing suggests that our alternative sentence-based CHI will fulﬁl this objective in the New Zealand context and offers a solution for other jurisdictions.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the Research and Evaluation teams at the Ministry of Justice and Department of Corrections, particularly Charles Sullivan and Wayne Goodall, for providing sentencing data and critical discussions in developing the NZ CHI. The assistance of the NZ Police Data Analytics team in providing offence data is also gratefully acknowledged, as is the contribution of our colleagues in the NZ Police Research and Evaluation team in reviewing early drafts of this article. Our gratitude is further extended to the anonymous peer reviewers for their assistance in reﬁning this work.

References

Amoah-Ntim, E. (2011). ‘Considering a Shift in Criminal Justice Spending’. Corrections Today 73(5): 109–110.

Andersson, C. (2003). Development of a National Offence Index for the Ranking of Offences. Paper presented at the 2003 AIC/ABS Conference - Evaluation in Crime and Justice: Trends and Methods. www.aic.gov.au/media_library/conferences/evaluation/andersson.pdf/ (accessed 8 November 2016).

Babyak, C., Alavi, A., Collins, K., Halladay, A., and Tapper, D. (2009). The Methodology of the Police-Reported Crime Severity Index. Ottawa: Statistics Canada. http://www.ssc. ca/sites/ssc/ﬁles/survey/documents/SSC2009_CBabyak. pdf/ (accessed 27 October 2016).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Bland, M. and Ariel, B. (2015). ‘Targeting Escalation in Reported Domestic Abuse: Evidence From 36,000 Callouts’. International Criminal Justice Review 25(1): 30–53.

Department of Corrections (2016). Average Time to Release for Different Sentences. Statistics provided by the Department of Corrections, September 2016.

Epley, N. and Gilovich, T. (2006). ‘The Anchoring-andAdjustment Heuristic: Why the Adjustments are Insufﬁcient’. Psychological Science 17(4): 311–318.

Gehlbach, H. and Barge, S. (2012). ‘Anchoring and Adjusting in Questionnaire Responses’. Basic and Applied Social Psychology 34(5): 417–433.

Goodall, W. (2014). Sentencing Consistency in the New Zealand District Courts. Ph.D. thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand.

Goodall, W. and Durrant, R. (2013). ‘Regional Variation in Sentencing: The Incarceration of Aggravated Drink Drivers in the New Zealand District Courts’. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology 46: 422–448.

Hales, G. and Higgins, A. (2016). Police Effectiveness in a Changing World Paper 2: Prioritisation in a Changing World: Seven Challenges for Policing. London: The Police Foundation. http://www.police-foundation.org. uk/uploads/holding/projects/police_prioritisation.pdf/ (accessed 8 November 2016).

Heaton, P. (2010). Hidden in Plain Sight: What Cost-ofCrime Research Can Tell Us about Investing in Police. Washington DC: RAND Corporation.

Hou, Y., Sun, C., and Edara, P. (2012). ‘Statistical Test for 85th And 15th Percentile Speeds with Asymptotic Distribution of Sample Quantiles’. Transportation Research Record 2279: 47–53.

Ignatans, D. and Pease, K. (2015). ‘Taking Crime Seriously: Playing the Weighting Game’. Policing 10(3): 184–193. Innes, M. (2014). Signal Crimes: Social Reactions to Crime, Disorder and Control. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Law Commission (2006). Sentencing Guidelines and Parole Reform (NZLC Report R94). Wellington: New Zealand Law Commission. http://www.lawcom.govt.nz/our-projects/sentencing-parole?id=874/ (accessed 27 October 2016).

Law Commission (2013). Maximum Penalties for Criminal Offences (NZLC Report SP21). Wellington: New Zealand Law Commission. http://www.lawcom.govt.nz/our-projects/maximum-penalties/ (accessed 27 October 2016).

Mallet (2014). http://www.victoria.ac.nz/law/research/publications/vuwlr/prev-issues/volume-46,-issue-2/Mallett. pdf/ (last accessed 4 August 2017).

Ministry of Justice (MOJ) (2017). Justice Sector Seriousness Score (2016 update): FAQs. Wellington, NZ: Ministry of Justice. https://www.justice.govt.nz/assets/Documents/

Publications/2016-FAQs-Seriousness-Scores.pdf/ (accessed 16 February 2017).

Ofﬁce for National Statistics (ONS) (2016). Research Outputs: Developing a Crime Severity Score for England and Wales using Data on Crimes Recorded by the Police. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulatio nandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/researchout putsdevelopingacrimeseverityscoreforenglandandwalesusingdataoncrimesrecordedbythepolice/2016-11-29/ (accessed 5 January 2017).

NZ Police (2016a). Annual Report 2014/2015. Available at: http://www.police.govt.nz/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/annual-report-2015.pdf/ (accessed 9 November 2016).

NZ Police, (2016b). Our Business. http://www.police.govt. nz/about-us/publication/our-business, (accessed 9 November 2016).

- Neyroud, P. (2016a). ‘Feel the Quality’. Police Professional 489: 17–19.
- Neyroud, P. (2016b). Fewer Victims by Better Targeting. http://slideplayer.com/slide/10068469/ (accessed 20 October 2016).


Parliamentary Counsel Ofﬁce (2016). Legislation Waiting to be Brought into Force by Order in Council (as at 1 July 2014). http://www.pco.parliament.govt.nz/legislation-wa iting-to-be-brought-into-force/ (accessed 27 October 2016).

Pol, R. (2016). ‘Revisiting Crime Rates as a Measure of Crime Prevention Effectiveness: Does the ‘Crime Drop’ Reveal a Policy Effectiveness ‘Outcomes’ Gap?’. Student Pulse 8(2) http://www.studentpulse.com/a?id=1350, (accessed 27 October 2016).

- Ratcliffe, J. (2015a). ‘Towards an Index for Harm-Focused Policing’. Policing 9(2): 164–183.
- Ratcliffe, J. (2015b). ‘Harm-Focused Policing’. Ideas in American Policing 19: 1–11.


Sherman, L. (2013). ‘The Rise of Evidence-Based Policing: Targeting, Testing, and Tracking’. Crime and Justice 42(1): 377–451.

Sherman, L., Neyroud, P., and Neyroud, E. (2016). ‘The Cambridge Crime Harm Index: Measuring Total Harm from Crime Based on Sentencing Guidelines’. Policing 10(3): 171–183.

Silver, N. (2012). The Signal and the Noise: Why so Many Predictions Fail- But Some Don’t. New York: Penguin Press.

Sweeten, G. (2012). ‘Scaling Criminal Offending’. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 28: 533–557.

Weinborn, C., Ariel, B., Sherman, L., and O’ Dwyer, E. (2017). ‘Hotspots vs. Harmspots: Shifting the Focus from Counts to Harm in The Criminology of Place.’ Applied Geography http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog. 2017.06.009/ (accessed 4 August 2017).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/455/4092863 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

