439

|Article|
|---|


# Comparing Methods for Measuring Crime Harm/Severity

## Matthew P. J. Ashby

Abstract Ensuring police resources are focused where they are most needed requires understanding of the consequences of crime in relation to offenders, victims, and places. Most crime analysis is based on counts of crimes, but not all crimes are equivalent to one another. Researchers have recently developed two methods—the Crime Harm Index and the Crime Severity Score—for weighting crime counts according to the severity of different crime types. This article compares these two methods by applying them to two common crime-analysis scenarios: focusing resources on the most-important types of crime and in the areas most affected by crime. The two measures are found to produce substantially different results when other factors are held constant. The results of severity-weighted crime analysis (and the decision made based on them) could therefore be greatly inﬂuenced by the method chosen. The implications of this are discussed and future research avenues outlined.

Introduction

This article compares two methods that have recently been proposed for weighting counts of crime in England and Wales according to the seriousness of different offences, so as to give greater priority to those offences that cause the most damage to individuals or society. These methods are the Cambridge Crime Harm Index and the Ofﬁce for National Statistics Crime Severity Score.

These methods have the same objective but differ in the basis on which they estimate the relative seriousness of different crimes. This article will demonstrate that these different approaches produce substantial differences in the estimates made, both in comparing types of crime to one another and in comparing the total seriousness of crime in different

areas. It will also give examples of how these differences could lead to researchers and practitioners reaching different conclusions based solely on their choice of one method rather than the other.

Why estimate the overall seriousness of crime?

The past decade has been a time of substantial change for policing in England and Wales. Pressure on public-sector budgets caused by government responses to the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis has led to substantial resource reductions, with the number of police ofﬁcers in England and Wales per head of population in 2017 being the lowest since 1975 (Fig. 1). At the same time, a system in which many policing priorities were set nationally has been

School of Social Sciences, Nottingham Trent University, Shakespeare Street, Nottingham NG1 4FQ, UK. E-mail: matthew.ashby@ntu.ac.uk

Advance Access publication: 23 August 2017 Policing, Volume 12, Number 4, pp. 439–454 doi:10.1093/police/pax049

The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

full-time equivalent number of police officers per 100,000 population

300

1975: most-recent year with fewer police officers per capita than 2017

austerity period

| | | | | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | |


250

200

150

100

- 50


- 0


1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

- Figure 1: Number of police ofﬁcers per capita in England and Wales, 1966–2017. Data: Home Ofﬁce (2017a).


replaced by one in which an elected Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) in each force sets most priorities locally (Hales and Higgins, 2016). National targets to reduce particular types of crime have been abandoned, replaced by local priorities that differ across forces. Finally, reports into policing failures such as the Rotherham child-abuse scandal (Jay, 2014) and the death of Fiona Pilkington (Independent Police Complaints Commission, 2011) provided reminders that policing responsibilities are (and always have been) much broader than dealing with the types of volume crime (most notably residential burglary, car theft, and street robbery) that consumed much of the attention of policymakers in the 1990s and early 2000s.

Combined, these factors have meant that police forces are now responsible for deciding how to allocate their dwindling resources across an array of problems that is at least as wide as it has been in the past. The question of which problems get which resources is a difﬁcult one, with many potential answers (see, for example, Higgins, 2017, in the context of neighbourhood policing).

One method of allocating scarce resources has been to try to focus resources on those problems that cause the most harm to communities. For example, the national strategy for roads policing emphasizes ‘focused harm reduction’ by targeting ‘those high harm offenders who pose the greatest risks to the safety of others’ (Association of Chief Police Ofﬁcers, 2010, pp. 1–2). The ‘Policing Vision 2025’, jointly published in 2016 by the Association of Police and Crime Commissioners (APCC) and National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC), commits the police to focusing on ‘high harm’ offences (p. 6).

This renewed focus on reducing harm ﬁts well with the increasing interest in evidence-based policing (EBP). Sherman (2013) described focusing police resources on the victims, offenders, and places that most need them as one of the three fundamental practices of EBP. He referred to focusing resources as ‘targeting’, a term that has unfortunate connotations in British policing because setting numerical performance targets for volume crime is widely seen as having hampered a focus on less-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

visible offences that can cause the most harm (Guilfoyle, 2012). Whatever terms are used, there is strong evidence that it is effective to focus police resources on proliﬁc offenders (e.g. Sherman and Eck, 2002), repeat victims (e.g. Grove et al., 2012) and places at which crimes frequently happen (e.g. Braga et al., 2014).

Methods for estimating crime harm

It is without doubt that some types of criminal activity cause more harm than others: it is a crime to murder and it is a crime to shoplift, but those two crimes are vastly different in the harm that they cause to the victim and to the society. However, to understand the harms caused by different crimes it is necessary to have more-detailed information than the bald statement that shoplifting is less serious than murder.

Identifying the true harms caused by crime is difﬁcult because harm can come in so many forms. There are enormous, and hugely varying, ﬁnancial costs of crime, both for the victim and for the society (McCollister et al., 2010). Many crimes cause serious emotional harm to victims (Frieze et al., 1987), which is likely to be different for different people even within a single crime type (Kilpatrick et al., 1989). Crime can also cause environmental and social harm (Bricknell, 2010).

The different types of harm caused by crime mean that overall harm can be estimated in several ways. For any estimation method to be valuable for policing purposes, it must fulﬁl at least four criteria: comparability, consistency, transparency, and affordability.

Comparability means different crimes must be made comparable to one another, since prioritizing resources means some be given greater attention than others. This is difﬁcult because one crime type may, for example, be more ﬁnancially harmful than another type but less socially harmful.

Consistency means any estimate must be reproducible, to allow comparison of estimates produced by different analysts in different areas. This precludes estimates based on individual perceptions of harm, although such estimates may be useful for other purposes (Ignatans and Pease, 2015).

Transparency means it must be possible to understand how an estimate of crime harm is produced. This ensures decision makers know the limitations of that method, and allows people affected by decisions made on the basis of such estimates to hold decision makers to account.

Finally, affordability means it must be possible to deploy a method without diverting scarce police or other public-sector resources. This, for example, precludes methods that require extensive collection of data that are not collected for an existing policing purpose.

There have been several attempts to develop indices of crime harm (for a recent review, see Sherman et al., 2016b). Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) developed an index based on perceptions of harm derived from a population survey in the USA as long ago as 1964, an effort later updated by Wolfgang et al. (1985). However, similar work in the UK has been limited.

That position has changed recently, with the development of two methods that appear to fulﬁl the criteria set out above. The Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI) developed by Sherman et al. (2016b) uses sentencing guidelines issued to judges and magistrates as a proxy for the typical harm caused by each type of crime. The Crime Severity Score (CSS) developed by the Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2016b) takes a slightly different approach, using the mean sentence actually passed on those convicted of offences in each type rather than the guideline sentence.

One difference between these two measures is terminology: the CHI refers to crime ‘harm’ while the CSS discusses the ‘severity’ of crime. In their explanation of the CHI, Sherman et al. (2016b) appeared to treat harm as being synonymous with seriousness, although they did not explicitly discuss

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

it. Since the focus of this article is to compare the two measures, rather than to critique the general concept of producing weighted counts of crimes (for which, see Maguire and McVie, 2017), the words harm and severity will be used interchangeably in the discussion that follows.

The CHI is based on the perceptions of crime severity expressed by the Sentencing Council for England and Wales in the guidelines that they issue to magistrates and judges (Sherman et al., 2016b).1 The logic behind this is that the severity of a particular offence is ‘the key factor’ (emphasis added) in deciding on the level of any custodial, community or ﬁnancial penalty imposed by a court (Sentencing Guidelines Council, 2004, p. 3). As such, the severity of any sentence set out in a guideline is deemed to be proportionate to the overall severity of the offence, taking into account the different types of harm that crime causes (Sherman et al., 2016b).

Sentencing guidelines provide a range of possible sentences, to allow judges or magistrates to account for the individual circumstances of each offence. Guidelines therefore usually include a startingpoint sentence, followed by a list of potential aggravating and mitigating factors that might justify increasing or decreasing the sentence relative to the starting point. Potential aggravating factors include racial hostility towards the victim, while mitigating factors include extensive provocation (Sentencing Guidelines Council, 2008). The CHI is based on the starting-point sentence that would be given to an adult offender with no previous convictions in a case with no aggravating or mitigating factors, expressed in terms of the days of imprisonment (Sherman et al., 2016b).

The CSS is derived by calculating the mean number of days of imprisonment that offenders were sentenced to serve after conviction for each type of offence in the 5years ending in December 2015 (Ofﬁce for National Statistics, 2016b). Both methods convert non-custodial sentences into

nominal days of imprisonment using a similar method, as outlined in the Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2016b) and Sherman et al. (2016b).

If all offenders were given the starting-point sentence, the two measures would be equivalent. However, there are several reasons why actual sentences may deviate from the relevant guideline. First, some offences may be more-commonly associated with aggravating factors than other offences. For example, car thieves are particularly likely to reoffend after release (Langan and Levin, 2002, p. 8), which would be an aggravating factor when they are sentenced for subsequent offences.

Some offences are disproportionately dealt with by out-of-court disposals, which may mean that those cases which go to court (and so contribute to sentencing statistics) are more serious than a typical offence in that category. For example, in the year ending September 2015 more than 12,000 shoplifting offences were dealt with by issuing a ﬁxed penalty notice (Ministry of Justice, 2016), meaning the offender did not enter the sentencing system. Since ﬁxed penalties can only be issued for minor shoplifting offences (Ministry of Justice, 2014), offences dealt with by the courts may be unusually serious. If so, this could distort the mean sentence for shoplifting relative to the sentencing guideline.

In England and Wales, offenders who plead guilty at the ‘ﬁrst reasonable opportunity’ are entitled to a one-third discount on their sentence, with a reduced discount being available for later guilty pleas (Sentencing Guidelines Council, 2007). Since offenders appear less likely to plead guilty for some offences (Feist et al., 2007), this may lead to such offences being over-weighted in the CSS if a greater proportion of sentences for those offences do not include a discount for a guilty plea.

For these reasons, it is likely that there will be differences between the estimates of crime severity produced by the CHI and CSS. The question this

- 1 Until 2010, the Sentencing Council for England and Wales was known as the Sentencing Guidelines Council.


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

article seeks to answer is: Are these differences likely to have any material impact on the results of analysis that uses one of these measures to estimate the severity of crime?

Comparing CHI and CSS values for individual offences

The previous section outlined several theoretical reasons why severity estimates produced by the CHI and CSS might differ from one another. This section explains what differences actually exist in practice. To quantify the differences for individual offences, it was necessary to calculate the value for each offence type. CSS values were obtained from Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2016b), while CHI values were kindly provided by the team that developed that index.

The CSS and CHI values were not immediately comparable because they categorized crimes in different ways. The CSS provides severity scores for each offence on the Home Ofﬁce Notiﬁable Offences List (NOL) (Home Ofﬁce, 2011, pp. 56– 61), with a small number of very-rare offences such as infanticide being collapsed into related categories (for a full list, see Appendix A). CHI values, however, have been generated for a selection of Home Ofﬁce statistics codes, which provide a more-detailed classiﬁcation than the NOL. For example, murder is a single category within the NOL but includes offences with two different Home Ofﬁce codes, one for murder of a person aged 1year or over, and one for victims aged under 1year.

Some Home Ofﬁce codes are extremely obscure, such as code 195/39 which represents the offence of indecent behaviour in a church or chapel, contrary to section 2 of the Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act of 1860. The list of CHI weights does not generally cover such offences. A further issue is that some offences, particularly those newly enacted, are not covered by any sentencing guidelines.

To compare the two measures of severity, it was necessary to aggregate the Home Ofﬁce codes used for the CHI to the NOL categories used by the CSS. In most cases, a single sentencing guideline covered all Home Ofﬁce codes within a NOL category. For example, the two Home Ofﬁce codes making up category 19C (rape of a female aged 16years or over) carry the same starting-point sentence of 5years imprisonment. However, in some cases the offences within an NOL category carry vastly different guideline sentences. For example, NOL category 17A (sexual assault on a male aged 13years or over) includes the offences of sexual assault on a male (Home Ofﬁce code 017/15) with a starting point of a high-level community order, and sexual assault on a male by penetration (Home Ofﬁce code 017/13) with a stating point of 2years imprisonment. In these cases, the lower starting point was applied on the basis that less-serious offences are usually more common.

Figure 2 compares the CHI and CSS values for each of 120 NOL categories. Four categories could not be included because there is no sentencing guideline on which to base the CHI value,2 but together these represent less than 0.1% of all offences recorded by police.

Each NOL category in Fig. 2 is represented by a circle, scaled proportionally to the number of offences in that category recorded by police in England and Wales in the 12 months ending in March 2016, published in Home Ofﬁce (2017b). A complete list of NOL codes, CHI and CSS values is given at Appendix A.

For most offence categories, the CSS value is greater than the CHI value: mean sentences are typically longer than the starting-point guideline sentence for that offence. In many cases this difference is substantial. For example, the starting-point guideline sentence (CHI value) for assaults with injury (NOL category 8N) is 19 days imprisonment, but the actual mean sentence (CSS value) is

- 2 These were NOL categories 14 (procuring an illegal abortion), 55 (bankruptcy offences), 90 (other knives offences), and 99 (other notiﬁable offences).


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

equal value

× 2

× 10

50

10,000

Crime Severity Score

×

× 2

20A, 28A/B/C/D

- 1,000

- 2,000


10

×

33A, 53H, 53J

8N

30A/B

61A

52

47

× 50

200

100

8L

Legend Recorded offences, 2015–16

- 105A


45, 49

1,000 crimes

20

46

10,000 crimes

100,000 crimes

10

0

9A

500,000 crimes

- 1

- 2


fraud offences¹

58A, 58C, 58D

Crime Harm Index

1 2 10 20 100 200 1,000 2,000 10,000

¹ offence counts for Notifiable Offence List categories related to fraud are no longer published by the Home Office

- Figure 2: Offence severity weights generated by the CHI and CSS. Both axes have logarithmic scales. Categories with more than 100,000 crimes, or for which the weight given by one method is more than 50 times different from the weight given by the other method, are labelled; see Appendix A for a full list.


184 days—almost 10 times greater. At the extreme, the CSS value for possession of false documents (NOL category 61A) is 66 times greater than the CHI value for that category. This may be because aggravating factors are typically more numerous or more severe than mitigating factors in sentencing for many offences, as discussed in the previous section.

There are, however, exceptions: the guideline sentence for intentional destruction of a viable unborn child (NOL category 4.3) is 365 days imprisonment but the mean actual sentence is 15 days imprisonment. These atypical cases may be the result of such offences being more likely to feature mitigating factors relating, for example, to the offender’s state of mind (for a discussion of such

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- Figure 2 shows that there are substantial differences between the harm/severity weightings generated by the CHI and CSS. However, it remains to be seen whether these differences have any impact on any potential uses of the CHI or CSS in practice.

One suggested use of the two indices is in allocating resources to areas where the harm caused by crime is greatest (Huey, 2016; Sherman et al., 2016b). There are multiple aspects to resource allocation, one of which is the prioritization of types of crime. Figure 3 shows the CHI and CSS estimates of the proportion of total crime harm/severity in England and Wales caused by each of the 23 Home Ofﬁce offence subgroups.

Figure 3 is a parallel co-ordinate plot (Inselberg, 1997), in which the position of each dot on the

| | | |
|---|---|---|
| | | |


Crime Harm Index Crime Severity Score proportion of total harm/severity

0.0%

37.0%

0.0%

37.0%

Other sexual offences (9.2%)

Rape (36.3%)

Personal robbery (8.4%)

Drugs trafficking (4.8%)

Violence with injury (23.7%)

Domestic burglary (16.1%)

Other sexual offences (7.6%)

Rape (20.1%)

Personal robbery (6.2%)

Theft of a motor vehicle (1.8%)

Drugs trafficking (2.3%)

Violence with injury (23.0%)

Violence without injury (2.9%)

Domestic burglary (2.1%) Weapons possession (1.9%), Homicide (1.6%)

Other theft offences (1.6%)

Non-domestic burglary (4.5%) Violence without injury (4.4%) Other theft offences (3.8%)

- Figure 3: Estimated proportion of total crime severity attributable to each of the Home Ofﬁce offence subgroups, as measured by the CHI and CSS, based on police-recorded crime in England and Wales in 2015–16.


issues in relation to child destruction, see Shelton et al., 2011).

What impact might this have in practice?

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

vertical axes represents the proportion of harm caused by each category according to each method, while the difference between the two methods for each category is shown by the line connecting each pair of dots (one for each method). The 10 categories causing the most harm according to each measure are labelled.

If the two methods produced the same estimates, all the lines in Fig. 3 would be horizontal. That some lines a sharply sloped shows that there are substantial differences between the two measures in those categories. For example, rape accounts for over one-third of all crime harm according to the CHI, but only about one-ﬁfth according to the CSS. Conversely, domestic burglary represents 16.1% of harm according to the CSS, but only 2.1% according to the CHI. That some lines cross one another shows that there are also differences in the ordering of crime types. For example, the CHI estimates trafﬁcking of drugs to cause greater harm than violence without injury, while the opposite is true according to the CSS.

These very large differences are caused entirely by the different methods used by the CHI and CSS. If a measure of harm/severity were to be used to allocate scarce policing or crime-prevention resources, the choice of measure would substantially inﬂuence the results.

Another aspect of resource allocation is the division of resources between geographic areas. Figure 4 compares the CHI and CSS estimated rate of harm/ severity per 1,000 residents in each police force area in England and Wales.

Once again, there are substantial differences in both the values produced by the two estimation methods and in the ordering of forces. For example, the rate of harm per 1,000 residents estimated by the CSS in the Cleveland Police area is 50% greater than that estimated by the CHI. Conversely, the West Midlands Police area has the third highest rate of harm according to the CHI but only the 17th highest rate according to the CSS. If resources were to be allocated to forces according to the relative severity of crime in each area, the allocation of

resources would appear to depend heavily on the estimation method chosen.

This can be seen using the example of government funding for the police. Forces in England and Wales are funded partly through local taxation and partly from a central government grant (Johnson and Politowski, 2016). The amount of grant money received by each force is determined by a formula that is designed to reﬂect the challenges facing police in each area. The present formula attempts to capture the demand caused by crime in each area by measuring correlates of crime such as unemployment and population density (Home Ofﬁce, 2015), but has been criticized as ‘outdated, vague and unfair’ (Ludwig and McLean, 2016, p. 2). If a new formula were to incorporate a measure of crime harm or severity (as suggested by Sherman et al., 2016b), what effect would the choice of measure have on the funding allocated to each force?

Imagine the hypothetical case of 25% of central government funding to a police force being allocated based on the proportion of total crime harm dealt with by that force. Figure 5 shows the difference between the funding each force would get in such a scenario if harm were estimated according to the CHI or CSS, expressed as a percentage of each force’s government grant for the 2015– 16year. The right-hand column shows this difference in absolute terms.

The difference between annual allocations using the two methods would be greater than £1 million for 33 of the 43 forces in England and Wales. Based on the NPCC estimate of the cost of a police ofﬁcer (including direct overheads) of £56,134 per year (National Police Chiefs Council, 2015), this difference could have a substantial impact on the number of ofﬁcers a force can afford to deploy. For example, the difference is greater than 100 ofﬁcers for the Hampshire, Metropolitan, Surrey, Thames Valley, and West Midlands forces. However, small forces would also experience substantial differences according to the method used: for Dorset Police, the difference would be equivalent to 7.5% of the annual government grant.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

W Yorks (4,695)

W Yorks (4,119), G Manchester (4,113)

| | | |
|---|---|---|
| | | |


Metropolitan (3,950)

W Midlands (3,744)

G Manchester (4,266)

Cleveland (4,193)

S Yorks (3,559)

Humberside (3,498)

Merseyside (3,455)

Notts (3,401)

Metropolitan (3,881)

W Mercia (3,301), Staffs (3,288) Cleveland (3,273)

Humberside (3,819), Northants (3,813)

Kent (3,184)

S Yorks (3,668)

England & Wales (3,104), Northants (3,094)

Suffolk (3,592), Hants (3,570)

Northumbria (2,994), Suffolk (2,981) Avon & Somerset (2,954), Hants (2,938)

Northumbria (3,523)

W Mercia (3,471), Notts (3,453) Avon & Somerset (3,441), Staffs (3,431)

S Wales (2,909), Lancs (2,896)

England & Wales (3,361), Merseyside (3,347)

Warwicks (2,806), N Wales (2,788) Essex (2,757), Cambs (2,737), Gwent (2,707)

W Midlands (3,287)

Derbys (2,706), Lincs (2,681)

Kent (3,232), Essex (3,226), Lancs (3,214)

Beds (2,630)

Warwicks (3,098), N Wales (3,067), Lincs (3,030) Cambs (3,014), Durham (3,004) Thames Valley (3,001), Norfolk (2,980)

Durham (2,517), Norfolk (2,510) Devon & Cornwall (2,454), Wilts (2,445)

Sussex (2,385)

Beds (2,919), Dorset (2,910)

Gloucs (2,295), Thames Valley (2,274) Dyfed-Powys (2,261), Leics (2,258) Cumbria (2,219)

Wilts (2,847), Gwent (2,840), Sussex (2,836)

S Wales (2,789)

Leics (2,737)

Derbys (2,689)

Cumbria (2,634)

Dorset (2,072)

N Yorks (2,036)

Herts (2,560)

Gloucs (2,529)

Herts (1,958)

Dyfed-Powys (2,489)

Cheshire (1,912)

Surrey (2,446), Devon & Cornwall (2,425)

N Yorks (2,383)

Cheshire (2,310)

Surrey (1,772)

Crime Harm Index per 1,000 residents¹

Crime Severity Score per 1,000 residents¹

¹ excludes fraud, since offence counts for NOL categories related to fraud are no longer published by the Home Office

- Figure 4: Estimated crime harm/severity per 1,000 residents as measured by the CHI and CSS, excluding City of London Police, based on police-recorded crime in England and Wales in 2015–16.


Overall, it can be seen that choice of estimation method can have a substantial impact on the apparent severity of crime in an area, even when all other factors are held constant. Estimates of harm produced using the CHI and CSS are not comparable to one another, and the two should not be used interchangeably. Given these differences, the next

section of this article discusses which of the two methods researchers and practitioners should use.

Which method to use?

The beneﬁts of estimating weighted counts of crime, outlined by Sherman et al. (2016b) among

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

difference in central government funding if allocated using CHI or CSS, £million

| | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | | | |


Dorset

5.0

Surrey

6.0

Thames Valley

12.5

South Wales

4.6

West Midlands

21.3

Northamptonshire

3.3

Hertfordshire

5.0

Cleveland

3.6

Hampshire

7.4

Suffolk

2.7

Leicestershire

3.0

Norfolk

2.3

Sussex

4.1

Essex

4.2

Derbyshire

2.4

Avon and Somerset

4.0

Wiltshire

1.4

Devon and Cornwall

3.9

Merseyside

5.4

Cheshire

2.5

Kent

3.8

Durham

1.7

Nottinghamshire

2.5

North Yorkshire

1.4

Metropolitan

33.6

Northumbria

4.0

Cumbria

1.1

West Yorkshire

5.3

Lincolnshire

0.9

South Yorkshire

2.5

Gwent

0.5

Staffordshire

1.4

Greater Manchester

5.0

West Mercia

1.3

City of London

0.5

North Wales

0.3

Bedfordshire

0.5

Dyfed-Powys

0.2

Warwickshire

0.3

Lancashire

1.1

Cambridgeshire

0.4

Gloucestershire

0.3

Humberside

0.3

0% 2% 4% 6% proportion of central government funding to force

- Figure 5: Difference in police funding if 25% of the central-government grant to forces were allocated according to the CHI or CSS, as a percentage of current funding, based on police-recorded crime in 2015–16.


others, are clear. The resources available to prevent and respond to crime will always be limited and so must be directed where they are needed most. Prioritizing resources requires a means of determining which people and places are most affected by crime, and this is better done by using a harmweighted count of crimes than by a simple tally.

This does not mean that either the CHI or CSS is perfect. Both assume that every crime in a particular category has the same degree of seriousness. This is clearly not true: some burglaries (for example) involve violence, extensive damage to property or the theft of items of sentimental value, while others have none of those features. Even if two offences of the same type are identical, different victims may experience them in very different ways.

Nevertheless, it is clear that weighting crime counts by severity has potential beneﬁts both for research and practice. This can be seen in their rapid adoption both within policing and academia (see, for example, Ashby, 2017; Bland and Ariel, 2015; Dudﬁeld et al., 2017; Sherman et al., 2016a). Since two measures are available, the question arises of which is more useful.

The CHI and CSS have different weaknesses. Since it is based on actual sentences, the CSS reﬂects sentencing considerations that are unrelated to offence severity. For example, in 2016 the most senior judge in England and Wales recommended greater use of non-custodial sentences to tackle prison overcrowding (Hughes, 2016), which could inﬂuence sentencing without any change in offence severity. Some offences are disproportionately committed by persistent offenders—Moore (1984) found two-thirds of convicted shoplifters offended at least weekly—which will inﬂate the mean sentence for such crimes.

Sherman et al. (2016b) argued against the use of indices (such as the CSS) based on actual sentences precisely because they are inﬂuenced by factors other than severity. However, such indices may also capture elements of severity that are ignored by methods (such as the CHI) based on sentencing guidelines. If a particular offence almost-always involves substantial mitigation—such as child destruction, discussed above—then a sentencing guideline may systematically overstate the severity of such offences. Conversely, if an offence veryoften has aggravating features—such as distraction burglaries, which almost always target vulnerable victims (Lister et al., 2004)—severity may be

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

systematically under-estimated. In such cases, an index based on actual sentences may better reﬂect the severity of crime.

Given that both measures have the potential to produce biased estimates of crime harm (although both appear to be better than unweighted counts of crime), there does not appear to be any reason to prefer one measure over the other. However, since the two methods produce substantially different estimates, it would be beneﬁcial for a consensus to emerge among academics and professionals as to which method is used. This would allow the work of different groups to be compared, and allow researchers to build on the work of others.

Both the CHI and CSS could be improved to make them easier to use and to provide more useful information. At present, the CHI does not cover all offences because there are crimes for which there are no sentencing guidelines. The Sentencing Council is developing guidelines for such offences, but this is a lengthy process (Sentencing Council, 2016). It may be valuable to develop ways to incorporate offences without guidelines into the CHI as an interim solution.

The CSS covers all offence types, but only at the relatively aggregate level of the NOL categories. As described above, some of these categories contain offences of substantially different severity, and the category of other notiﬁable offences covers a wide range of offending.

This is likely to be particularly problematic in uses of a severity index that require differentiation of similar offences. For example, it would be difﬁcult for a police force to prioritize drug investigations based on harm/severity, because all drug trafﬁcking offences are covered by a single NOL category (92A).

Publishing CSS estimates for more-granular offence types would potentially be problematic because very few offenders would be sentenced in some categories. This would mean that the CSS estimates for such offences would be based on a very small sample size. Even at the current level of aggregation, there are ﬁve NOL categories with fewer

than 10 cases recorded in 2015–16 (see Appendix A). Nevertheless, some NOL types cover very many offences: more than 400,000 offences were recorded in the largest category, assault with injury (8 N), in 2015–16.

The best level of aggregation at which to strike the balance between sufﬁcient detail and acceptable sample size may be the list of Home Ofﬁce statistics codes referred to earlier. In the case of drug trafﬁcking, the single NOL code is broken down into separate statistics codes for each of the common drugs encountered in the UK. This would provide useful additional information for some uses of severity weighting, and the Ofﬁce for National Statistics (ONS) should consider producing CSS estimates at this level of detail.

Sherman et al. (2016b, p. 8) describe the current CHI as a ‘beta’ version to be enhanced further, while the Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2016b) have requested feedback on the CSS. It may be that as these measures develop, one proves to be more useful than the other or is subject to greater development. In such circumstances, there may be grounds for preferring one over the other.

Conclusion

This article has demonstrated that there are substantial differences between the estimates of crime harm/severity produced by the CHI and CSS. These differences have the potential to be a major inﬂuence on the conclusions drawn from analysis based on such indices, and so analysts should exercise caution in their choice of index and their interpretation of results based on it.

Whichever measure becomes most widely used, further research is necessary to understand how effective these measures are as crime analysis tools. In keeping with the focus of EBP on targeting resources where they are most needed, such research could usefully focus on applying the CHI or CSS to concentrations of crime among offenders, victims, and places. Which offenders cause the most harm?

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Which victims suffer the most harm? And in which places does the most harm occur? It would also be useful to compare both indices to public perceptions of the severity of crime, to ensure that harmfocused policing enjoys public legitimacy. Finally, one limitation of both methods at present is that they do not capture the harm caused by crime that is not reported to police—adjusting harm/severity estimates to account for reporting rates would be a potentially useful addition to both the CHI and CSS.

It appears that analysis using weighted counts is being received favourably by several police forces, so it may be that some of these research questions are already being addressed by police analysts. If that is the case, it is important that the results of such work are disseminated (for example in journals such as this) so that practitioners and researchers elsewhere can beneﬁt from the insights produced.

References

Ashby, M. P. J. (2017). The Value of CCTV Surveillance Cameras as an Investigative Tool: An Empirical Analysis. In European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research. doi: 10.1007/s10610-017-9341-6.

Association of Chief Police Ofﬁcers (2010). Policing the Roads – 5Year Strategy 2011–2015. Wymondham, Norfolk: Association of Chief Police Ofﬁcers.

Association of Police and Crime Commissioners and National Police Chiefs’ Council (2016). Policing Vision

2025. London: National Police Chiefs’ Council.

Bland, M. and Ariel, B. (2015). ‘Targeting Escalation in Reported Domestic Abuse Evidence from 36,000 Callouts’. International Criminal Justice Review 25(1): 30–53.

Braga, A., Papachristos, A., and Hureau, D. (2014). ‘The Effects of Hot Spots Policing on Crime: an Updated Systematic Review and Meta-analysis’. Justice Quarterly 31(4): 633–663. 10.4073/csr.2012.8.

Bricknell, S. (2010). Environmental Crime in Australia. Research and Public Policy Series 109. Canberra: Australian Institute of Criminology.

Dudﬁeld, G., Angel, C., Sherman, L. W. and Torrence, S. (2017). ‘The “Power Curve” of Victim Arm: Targeting the Distribution of Crime Harm Index Values Across All

Victims and Repeat Victims over 1 Year’. Cambridge Journal of Evidence-Based Policing 1(1): 38–58.

Feist, A., Ashe, J., Lawrence, J., McPhee, D. and Wilson, R.

(2007). Investigating and Detecting Recorded Offences of Rape. London: Home Ofﬁce.

Frieze, I. H., Hymer, S., and Greenberg, M. S. (1987). ‘Describing the Crime Victim: Psychological Reactions to Victimization’. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 18(4): 299–315. DOI: 10.1037/0735-7028.18.4.299.

Grove, L. E., Farrell, G., Farrington, D. P. and Johnson, S. D. (2012). Preventing Repeat Victimization: A Systematic Review. Stockholm: Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention.

Guilfoyle, S. (2012). ‘On Target?—Public Sector Performance Management: Recurrent Themes, Consequences and Questions’. Policing 6(3): 250–260. DOI: 10.1093/police/pas001.

Hales, G. and Higgins, A. (2016). Prioritisation in a Changing World: Seven Challenges for Policing. London: Police Foundation.

Higgins, A. (2017). Neighbourhood Policing: a Police Force Typology. London: Police Foundation. Home Ofﬁce (2011). User Guide to Home Ofﬁce Crime Statistics. London: Home Ofﬁce. Home Ofﬁce (2015). The Police Grant Report (England and Wales) 2015/16. London: Home Ofﬁce.

- Home Ofﬁce (2017a). Historical Numbers of Police Ofﬁcers. https://www.whatdotheyknow.com/request/historical_ numbers_of_police_off/ (accessed 31 July 2017).
- Home Ofﬁce (2017b). Police Recorded Crime and Outcomes Open Data Tables. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/police-recorded-crime-open-data-tables/ (accessed 31 July 2017).


Huey, L. (2016). ‘Harm-focused Policing’. Journal of Community Safety and Well-Being 1(3): 83–85.

Hughes, L. (2016). ‘More Criminals should be Given Community Sentences Instead of Being Jailed, Says Britain’s Most Senior Judge’. The Telegraph. http://www. telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/22/criminals-should-givencommunity-sentences-instead-jailed-saysbritains/.

Ignatans, D. and Pease, K. (2015). ‘Taking Crime Seriously: Playing the Weighting Game’. Policing 10(3): 184–193. DOI: 10.1093/police/pav029.

Independent Police Complaints Commission (2011). IPCC Report into the Contact between Fiona Pilkington and Leicestershire Constabulary 2004–2007. London: Independent Police Complaints Commission. https:// www.ipcc.gov.uk/news/ipcc- publishes-ﬁona-pilkingtoninvestigation-report.

Inselberg, A. (1997). ‘Multidimensional Detective’. In: Proceedings of VIZ ’97: Visualization Conference, Information Visualization Symposium and Parallel Rendering Symposium. Phoenix: IEEE, pp. 100–107.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Jay, A. (2014). Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Exploitation in Rotherham, 1997–2003. Rotherham: Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council.

Johnson, N. and Politowski, B. (2016). Police Funding. Brieﬁng Paper series 7279. London: House of Commons Library.

Kilpatrick, D. G., Saunders, B. E., Amick-McMullan, A., Best, C. L., Veronen, L. J., and Resnick, H. S. (1989). ‘Victim and Crime Factors Associated with the Development of Crime-related Post-traumatic Stress Disorder’. Behavior Therapy 20(2): 199–214.

Langan, P. and Levin, D. J. (2002). Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994. Washington, DC: US Department of Justice.

Lister, S., Wall, D. and Bryan, J. (2004). Evaluation of the Leeds Distraction Burglary Initiative. Home Ofﬁce Online Report series 44/04. London: Home Ofﬁce.

Ludwig, A., and McLean, I. (2016). Principles of Police Funding in the UK. Gwilym Gibbon Centre Working Papers series. Oxford: Nufﬁeld College.

Maguire, M., and McVie, S. (2017). ‘Crime Data and Criminal Statistics: A Critical Reaction’. In: Liebling A., Maruna S. and McAra L. (eds), Oxford Handbook of Criminology, 6th edn., Chap. 7. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 163–189.

McCollister, K. E., French, M. T., and Fang, H. (2010). ‘The Cost of Crime to Society: New Crime-Speciﬁc Estimates for Policy and Program Evaluation’. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 108(1–2): 98–109. DOI: 10.1016/ j.drugalcdep.2009.12.002.

Ministry of Justice (2014). Penalty Notices for Disorder: guidance for police ofﬁcers. London: Ministry of Justice. https:// www.gov.uk/government/publications/penalty-noticesfor-disorder-guidance-for-police-ofﬁcers.

Ministry of Justice (2016). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: September 2016. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-september-2016.

Moore, R. H. (1984). ‘Shoplifting in Middle America: Patterns and Motivational Correlates’. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology 28(1): 53–64.

National Police Chiefs’ Council (2015). National Policing Guidelines on Charging for Police Services. London: National Police Chiefs’ Council.

- Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2016a). Crime Severity Score Data Tool. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/crimeseverity scoredatatool.
- Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2016b). Research Outputs: Developing a Crime Severity Score for England and Wales using Data on Crimes Recorded by the Police. http://bit.ly/ 2fZCUbY.


Sellin, T., and Wolfgang, M. E. (1964). The Measurement of Delinquency. New York: Wiley. Sentencing Council (2016). Business Plan Financial Year 2016/17. London: Sentencing Council.

Sentencing Guidelines Council (2004). Overarching Principles: Seriousness. London: Sentencing Guidelines Council.

- Sentencing Guidelines Council (2007). Reduction in Sentence for a Guilty Plea: Deﬁnitive Guideline. London: Sentencing Guidelines Council.
- Sentencing Guidelines Council (2008). Magistrates’ Court Sentencing Guidelines: Deﬁnitive Guideline. London: Sentencing Guidelines Council.


Shelton, J. L., Corey, T., Donaldson, W. H., and Dennison, E. H. (2011). ‘Neonaticide: A Comprehensive Review of Investigative and Pathologic Aspects of 55 Cases’. Journal of Family Violence 26(4): 263–276.

Sherman, L. W. (2013). ‘The Rise of Evidence-based Policing: Targeting, Testing, and Tracking’. Crime and Justice 42(1): 377–451.

Sherman, L. W., Bland, M., House, P., and Strang, H. (2016a). The Felonious Few vs. The Miscreant Many. Cambridge: Cambridge Centre for Evidence Based Policing.

Sherman, L. W, and Eck J. E. (2002). ‘Policing for crime prevention’. In: Sherman, L. W. Farrington, D. P. Welsh, B. C. and MacKenzie D. L. (eds), Evidence-Based Crime Prevention, Chap. 8. London: Routledge, pp. 295– 329.

Sherman, L. W., Neyroud, P., and Neyroud, E. (2016b). ‘The Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI): Measuring Total Harm from Crime Based on Sentencing Guidelines’. Policing 10(3): 171–183. DOI: 10.1093/police/paw003. Wolfgang, M. E., Figlio, R. M., Tracy, P. E., and Singer, S. I.

(1985). The National Survey of Crime Severity. Washington, DC: US Department of Justice.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

Appendix A

Notiﬁable Offence List Categories

NOL categorya CHIb CSSc Countd 1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.10: Murder, manslaughter, infanticide 5,475 7,979 574

- 2: Attempted murder 3,285 4,663 683
- 3A: Conspiracy to commit murder 1,460 2,019 48


- 3B: Threats to kill 10 280 17,286


- 4.3: Intentional destruction of a viable unborn child 365 15 7
- 4.4: Causing death by dangerous driving 1,095 1,092 448

- 4.6: Causing death by careless driving (drink or drugs) 548 1,595 28
- 4.7: Causing or allowing death of child or vulnerable person 1,095 1,006 23
- 4.8: Causing death by careless or inconsiderate driving 3 112 132
- 4.9: Causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualiﬁed, or uninsured 3 136 11

5D: Assault with intent to cause serious harm 1,460 1,965 23,029 5E: Endangering life 1,825 1,326 1,346 8L: Harassment 10 39 155,444

- 8M: Racially/religiously aggravated harassment 42 40 1,788
- 8N: Assault with injury 19 184 402,316


- 8P: Racially/religiously aggravated assault with injury 182 285 2,982
- 8Q: Stalking 42 51 4,155


- 9A: Public fear alarm or distress 5 10 134,682
- 9B: Racially/religiously aggravated public fear, alarm or distress 42 24 29,173


- 10A: Possession of ﬁrearms with intent 1,825 635 1,522

- 10B: Possession of ﬁrearms offences 183 327 3,246
- 10C: Possession of other weapons 19 58 9,117
- 10D: Possession of article with blade or point 19 55 11,498


- 11A: Cruelty to children/young persons 84 146 12,942




- 13: Child abduction 273 293 1,039
- 14: Procuring an illegal abortion – 1,020 7
- 15: Concealing an infant death close to birth 183 164 5


- 17A: Sexual assault on a male aged 13 years and over 19 747 3,455
- 17B: Sexual assault on a male child under 13years 182 817 2,617 19C: Rape of a female aged 16years and over 1,825 2,895 22,524


- 19D: Rape of a female child under 16 years 1,825 3,872 5,254
- 19E: Rape of a female child under 13years 2,920 3,229 4,181
- 19F: Rape of a male aged 16 and over 1,825 2,930 1,279
- 19G: Rape of a male child under 16years 1,825 3,905 669
- 19H: Rape of a male child under 13years 2,920 2,535 1,792


- 20A: Sexual assault on a female aged 13years or over 19 443 27,852
- 20B: Sexual assault on a female child under 13years 182 1,143 7,382


- 21: Sexual activity involving a child under 13 years 730 753 5,884
- 22A: Causing sexual activity without consent 19 923 585


- 22B: Sexual activity involving a child under 16years 730 709 11,337
- 23: Incest or familial sexual offences 1,278 1,046 771
- 24: Exploitation of prostitution 10 370 173


- 26: Bigamy 14 164 72
- 27: Soliciting for the purpose of prostitution 1 4 588


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

28A/B/C/D: Burglary in a dwelling 19 438 192,712 29: Aggravated burglary in a dwelling 365 2,127 1,700 30A/B: Burglary in a building other than a dwelling 10 117 206,419 31: Aggravated burglary in a building other than a dwelling 730 1,513 197

- 33: Going equipped for stealing 3 34 2,664

- 33A: Making, supplying, or possessing articles for use in fraud 2 123 2,626
- 34A: Robbery of business property 365 746 5,428


- 34B: Robbery of personal property 365 746 45,679
- 35: Blackmail 365 803 5,895
- 36: Kidnapping 548 1,213 2,998


- 37.1: Causing death by aggravated vehicle taking 548 722 6
- 37.2: Aggravated vehicle taking 10 48 5,701


- 38: Proﬁting from/concealing knowledge of the proceeds of crime 5 242 1,590
- 39: Theft from the person 2 86 83,139
- 40: Theft in a dwelling other than from automatic machine/meter 2 50 51,178
- 41: Theft by an employee 5 53 10,656
- 42: Theft of mail 2 85 2,358
- 43: Dishonest use of electricity 1 7 2,494
- 44: Theft or unauthorized taking of pedal cycle 2 16 86,520
- 45: Theft from a vehicle 2 34 238,850
- 46: Shoplifting 2 13 336,318
- 47: Theft from an automatic machine or meter 2 108 3,943
- 48: Theft or unauthorized taking of motor vehicle 5 124 76,179
- 49: Other theft 2 33 343,742 49A: Making off without payment 1 8 64,554


- 51: Frauds by company director, sole trader, etc. 182 733 –
- 52: False accounting 1 167 –
- 53B: Preserved other fraud and repealed fraud offences 91 208 – 53C: Fraud by false representation—cheque, plastic card, and online bank accounts 10 86 –


- 53D: Fraud by false representation—other fraud 10 224 –
- 53E: Fraud by failing to disclose information 10 24
- 53F: Fraud by abuse of position 252 224
- 53G: Obtaining services dishonestly 10 123
- 53H: Making or supplying articles for use in frauds 2 123


- 53J: Possession of articles for use in frauds 2 123 –
- 54: Handling stolen goods 2 54 5,295
- 55: Bankruptcy offences – 47 –
- 56A: Arson endangering life 730 837 3,273 56B: Arson 19 185 18,686


- 58A: Criminal damage to a dwelling 2 7 125,346
- 58B: Criminal damage to a building other than a dwelling 2 7 52,099
- 58C: Criminal damage to a vehicle 2 7 227,159
- 58D: Other criminal damage 2 7 110,822


- 58J: Racially/religiously aggravated criminal damage 5 19 2,046
- 59: Threat/possession with intent to commit criminal damage 2 59 12,823
- 60: Forgery or use of drug prescription 3 55 394
- 61: Other forgery 3 155 2,841


- 61A: Possession of false documents 3 199 1,018


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

- 62A: Violent disorder 183 365 987


- 66: Other offences against the state or public order 5 78 39,422
- 67: Perjury 91 114 122


- 69: Offender management act 183 175 2,714
- 70: Sexual activity etc. with a person with a mental disorder 1,825 1,410 245
- 71: Abuse of children through prostitution/pornography 1,825 870 563
- 72: Trafﬁcking for sexual exploitation 182 1,600 27
- 73: Abuse of position of trust of a sexual nature 10 243 239 76: Aiding suicide 1,095 4,392 35


- 79: Perverting the course of justice 42 165 6,376
- 80: Absconding from lawful custody 6 10 501
- 81: Other ﬁrearms offences 183 1,365 244 83: Bail offences 6 54 192 86: Obscene publications, etc. 91 155 12,883 88A: Sexual grooming 548 496 1,021 88C: Other miscellaneous sexual offences 730 1,001 232 88D: Unnatural sexual offences 183 53 35 88E: Exposure and voyeurism 10 41 8,154 90: Other knives offences 55 92A: Trafﬁcking in controlled drugs 365 497 25,824 92C: Other drug offences 10 11 595


- 92D: Possession of controlled drugs 3 9 29,117
- 92E: Possession of controlled drugs 2 3 93,160


- 95: Disclosure, obstruction, false or misleading statements 2 16 230
- 96: Wildlife offences 4 175 83 99: Other notiﬁable offences – 153 –


- 104: Assault without injury on a constable 2 9 15,454
- 105A: Assault without injury 1 16 343,212

105B: Racially/religiously aggravated assault without injury 10 36 5,585

- 106: Modern slavery 365 1,480 880 126: Interfering with a motor vehicle 3 12 45,558 802: Dangerous driving 10 120 4,077 814: Fraud forgery associated with vehicle or driver records 2 8 498


aHome Ofﬁce (2011). bEleanor Neyroud, personal communication. cOfﬁce for National Statistics (2016a). dHome Ofﬁce (2017 b).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/article/12/4/439/4092861 by University of Cambridge user on 21 March 2026

