American Sociological Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to American Sociological Review

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES: NORMATIVE STRUCTURE  AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES*

 PETER H. RossI

 EMILY WAITE

 The Johns Hopkins University

 CHRISTINE E. BOSE

 University of Washington

 and

 RICHARD E. BERK

 Northwestern University

 American Sociological Review 1974, Vol. 39 (April): 224-37

 Using ratings of the seriousness of a set of 140 crimes obtained from a household sample taken

 in Baltimore in 1972, the study explores certain collective characteristics of these ratings.

 Respondents largely agree on the relative ordering of crimes. Very few descriptive characteris tics of the crimes account for much of the variation from crime to crime in the average ratings

 received. The more highly educated and the younger the respondents, the more likely were

 their ratings to agree with average ratings computed over the entire sample. These findings  indicate that norms concerning crime seriousness are widely diffused throughout subgroups of

 our society.

 tions of criminal justice systems should corre-

 T he seriousness of criminal acts represents a  conceptual dimension of criminality indis pensable in everyday discourse, in legal

 spond to some degree.

 In many ways, "seriousness" as applied to

 criminal acts, resembles "prestige" as applied

 theory and practice, and in sociological work.  The seriousness of a criminal act may be viewed  as a normative evaluation, an overall judgment  which allows comparison among criminal acts,

 to occupations or other social statuses: both

 terms resist precise abstract definition; both  can be easily translated into operational forms  through the use of sample surveys; both are  important in empirical research; and both  remain obstinately necessary in technical and

 cultural values in different societies and cul-

 tures, and individual value differences. To be

 of theoretical or practical use, a measure of

 vernacular vocabularies.

 crime "seriousness" requires that a society  show consensus about the order of seriousness

 Of course, whether consensus exists over

 seriousness or consistency in the legal code or

 of specific criminal acts. This consensus

 actions of a criminal justice system is a matter  for empirical investigation. This issue is rele-

 should be reflected in the criminal code, the  behavior of judges and juries, and the actions  of law enforcement agencies. It is a moot

 vant to the current controversy over conflict  versus consensus models of deviant behavior.  The conflict model implies disagreement over

 question whether seriousness is defined by the  actions of criminal justice systems or vice

 what is to be considered serious, with dis-

 versa; but societal consensus and the opera-

 sensus generated by the varying interests of  subgroups in a society. To the extent that

 *The research reported in this paper was con ducted under grant 72Ni-99-0035-G from the Law

 empirical investigation shows great consensus,  the conflict model loses support.

 Enforcement Assistance Administration; co-principal

 investigators, Rossi and Berk. We are indebted to  Norman Waite for his expert help in programming  most of the analyses reported in this paper.

 Building on an important research tradi-

 tion, our research further specifies crime

 224

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES 225

 collar workers (N = 2745) with Sellin and

 "seriousness" and investigates its properties.

 Wolfgang's respondents. Velez-Diaz and

 This paper develops measures of the serious-

 Megargee's (1970) study of 175 young lower

 ness of criminal acts by examining the nature

 and degree of popular consensus concerning a

 class offenders and non-offenders in Puerto

 Rico is similarly supportive.

 reasonable sample of acts deemed criminal

 offenses in most of this country's legal juris-

 All these (see also McConnell and Martin,

 dictions, applying these measures to more

 1969) are vulnerable on grounds of internal

 representative populations, and trying to get

 and external validity. The samples used appear  to be "haphazard." The methods of ascertain-

 at what it is about criminal acts which leads  them to be regarded as more or less serious in  the popular eye.

 ing agreement among subgroups and between

 samples range from visual inspection of data

 The most extensive previous treatment  measuring crime seriousness is the pioneering

 arrays to regression coefficients.

 work of Sellin and Wolfgang (1964). Using

 The Design of the Baltimore Crime Serious-

 samples of judges, police and college students  in Philadelphia, they obtained ratings of the

 ness Study:

 Our research was conducted to develop  measures of crime seriousness for a much

 seriousness of 141 offenses, using an eleven  point rating scale for some respondents, and a

 larger study of the potential support for penal

 magnitude (ratio) scale for others. A small

 reforms among state elites.' We needed some

 subgroup (fifteen) of criminal acts was se lected from these 141, the offenses being

 rational basis for selecting a sample of crimes

 that varied according to seriousness and with  which quantitative measures of the "amount

 supplemented by descriptions of the con-

 sequences to victims of the criminal acts (e.g.

 of seriousness" were associated.

 amounts of property stolen or personal in-

 The vehicle used was a sample survey of

 jury). The end result of the Sellin-Wolfgang

 the adult population of Baltimore2 city con-

 researches is a set of fifteen descriptions of

 criminal acts along with scale scores for each

 'Supported by LEAA Grant 72Ni-99-0035-G

 act.

 entitled "Measuring The Potential Support for Penal

 Reform." The larger study was based on interviews  with elites (political office holders, criminal justice  personnel, etc.) in a sample of states. A basic  measure of the acceptance of penal reform was the

 Sellin and Wolfgang observed several im-

 portant properties of these seriousness mea-

 sures. First, respondents were able to handle

 both the rating and magnitude estimation

 presentation to each respondent of descriptions of  hypothetical convicted offenders varying systemat-

 tasks easily, suggesting that respondents make  such assessments in their daily lives. Secondly,

 ically in offense committed, age, and previous

 criminal record. Respondents were asked to allocate

 Sellin and Wolfgang note considerable agree-

 each hypothetical convicted offender to one of nine  "treatments" ranging in severity from parole to

 ment among subgroups about both the rela-

 tive ordering of criminal acts and the scale

 incarceration for ten or more years. We needed to

 know crime seriousness scores in order to estimate  the impact of crime seriousness on the ways in which

 scores given.

 The Sellin-Wolfgang results have not gone

 elite members thought each offender should be

 unchallenged. Rose (1966) questions the rep-

 treated in the corrections system of their state.  2To pick the sample, census tracts in the city

 resentativeness on the samples of raters and

 the evidence presented of subgroup consensus,

 were divided into three strata, those whose popula-

 tion was 90% or more white in 1970, those whose

 asserting that it is unclear whether the serious-

 population was 90% or more black in 1970 and the

 ness scores are generalizable and whether in

 remaining census tracts whose proportion black was  more than 10% and less than 90%. Since there are

 fact raters agreed as much as Sellin and  Wolfgang allege. Nevertheless, several replica-

 only a handful of tracts in this last category and they

 would present special problems in interviewing they

 tions support the Sellin-Wolfgang work.

 were dropped from further consideration. Within

 Normandeau (1966) finds much agreement  among French Canadian students, and (mod ified by a scaling factor) between his student

 each of the first two strata, we divided the census

 tracts into tertiles according to the median income in  each tract as of 1970. Within each of the six tertiles  so defined, we picked census tracts at random, one

 group and those studied by Sellin and Wolf-

 census tract within each largely white stratum and

 gang. Another Canadian replication, by

 two census tracts within each largely black stratum.  Within each of the census tracts so chosen, three to

 Akman, Normandeau and Turner (1967), re-

 ports similar agreement among Canadian uni-

 eight blocks, were picked depending on the number

 versity students, judges, police and white

 of interviews to be desired and the number of tracts

 226 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

 tioned concerning perceptions of the crime

 ducted in the fall of 1972. We chose Balti more mainly for convenience, bolstered by

 problem in Baltimore and such "background"

 identifying variables as age, occupation of

 the expectation that consensus among our

 sample would be so strong that one could

 household head, -and educational attainment.

 Each interview lasted about half an hour.

 safely generalize results to other parts of the  United States having quite different popula-

 The main body of the interview consisted

 of a card sorting task in which the respondent  placed each of eighty IBM cards3 (each  containing a short description of an offense)  into a box containing nine slots, each slot  corresponding to a level of crime seriousness.

 tion mixtures.

 For cost and convenience "block quota"  sampling design was used. Quotas were fixed

 to obtain 125 interviews with whites and  seventy-five interviews with blacks, and equal  numbers of males and females in each racial  group. The biases of this and similar sampling  plans are well known, (cf. Sudman: 1967)  with young males, households without chil dren or with very active persons generally

 The instructions called for crimes considered  most serious to be placed in the slot labelled

 "9" and crimes least serious in the slot  labelled "1"4 with crimes of intermediate

 seriousness being placed closer or further

 away from those two poles depending on the

 being under-represented.

 Of course, whether a potential bias is in

 respondent's perception. There was no at-

 fact a bias that influences the findings is

 tempt in the interview to define for the  respondent what was meant by "seriousness."

 problematic in each case, depending largely on

 Interviewers reported that most respon-

 the correlations between the potentially bias-

 dents performed the rating task easily. The

 ing factors and the phenomena under study.  The core of the interview administered was

 survey design called for 16,000 ratings (two

 a rating task in which respondents were asked

 hundred respondents each rating eighty

 to judge the seriousness of a list of offenses.

 crimes); 15,521 - or 97% - were finally ob-

 Two lists of eighty offenses were used, sharing  twenty offenses in common, sixty offenses

 tained. The distribution of ratings tended to  be more dense on the high serious end of the  nine point scale: the most popular rating was

 being different on each list. Thus, 140 of-

 fenses were rated by the Baltimore sample.

 'Each card contained a crime description and

 The rated offenses were picked by expanding

 punches indicating a code for the crime described on  the card and a code for the respondent. Interviewers

 the Uniform Crime Reports listing, trans-

 forming general crime categories into specific

 placed each sorted card into envelopes labelled with

 acts (e.g. "burglary" became "breaking and

 the slot number from which the card came. Com puter programs were developed to mark each card

 entering a house, stealing a transistor radio")

 automatically with the number of the slot into

 and by adding offenses not normally reported,  especially white collar crimes and crimes in

 which it was sorted and to create a record for each

 sorted card. This tape became the basic data tape for

 the process (at least in some states) of

 the analysis described in this paper. Note that this

 decriminalization. In addition to rating the

 technique considerably shortened interviewing time

 and reduced interviewer error involved in recording  responses. It also made it possible to produce

 eighty crimes, each respondent was ques-

 tabulated results within a day after the interviewing

 within that stratum. Within each block, professional

 had been completed.

 trained interviewers from Sidney Hollander and

 4The actual working of the question eliciting  ratings was as follows: "Criminal law covers a very  large number of different kinds of crimes. Some are

 Associates chose available male and female adult

 respondents until their quotas for total numbers of

 interviews and for equal numbers of each sex were

 considered to be very serious acts and others are not

 fulfilled. Interviewers were instructed to divide their

 so serious. We are interested in your opinions about  how serious you think different crimes are. We have

 interviewing time equally between daytime hours

 and nighttime or weekend hours to insure that

 made up descriptions of different kinds of crimes.

 persons working during the day would not be

 Here is one of the descriptions of crimes. (Inter-

 slighted. When there was no one at home in a

 viewer hands card to respondent.) Please put the

 dwelling unit or when no one eligible by virtue of

 card in the slot labelled number 9 if you think that

 age or sex was available in a dwelling unit, the

 this crime is among the most serious crimes. Put the

 interviewer proceeded to another dwelling unit. No

 card in slot number 1 if you think that the crime

 call-backs were made to dwelling units where no one

 described on the card is among the least serious. If

 appeared to be at home and no call-backs were made

 the crime described on the card fits somewhere in

 to obtain interviews with potentially eligible respon dents who were not at home at the time of the initial

 between the most serious and the least serious, put it  in a slot in between 9 and 1 depending on how  serious the crime is in your opinion."

 contact.

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES 227

 "9," with the lower ratings decreasing in  popularity. The average rating given all crimes  was 6.27, indicating that the typical crime was  placed above the median more often than

 consensus than it is to devise a suitable  standard against which a given degree of  consensus should be measured. In other  words, how much agreement should consensus

 below it.

 require? The answer to this question depends

 in part on what device is used to measure

 The Crime Seriousness Ratings:

 consensus: In this section we will use correla-

 tions, and we will use an arbitrary standard to

 Table 1 shows the average ratings received  by the 140 offenses, with the offenses ar ranged in rank order. A word of caution  should be sounded with respect to this rank  order: Adjacent crimes ordinarily are not sta tistically significantly different. A typical  standard error for a score is between .1 and

 define consensus, i.e. that the correlations

 among subgroups should meet the require-

 ments of a "reliable test." That is, if a test is

 to be regarded as reliable, we ordinarily

 expect correlations between alternative forms

 of the test or test-retest correlations to be .70

 or more.

 .3: Most crimes in adjacent ranks differ in the

 The correlations between certain major

 third decimal place.

 divisions of the Baltimore sample are shown in

 There are few surprises in the ratings  shown in Table 1. Crimes against persons,  especially murder, receive very high serious ness ratings. Crimes against property in which  no action is taken against people are rated  significantly lower; and at the end of the list

 Table 2. All the correlations in that table meet

 the "reliability" requirement, the correlation  between blacks and whites being .89, between  males and females .94 and between the better  educated and the less well educated, .89.  These coefficients indicate that knowing the

 are offenses often classified as misdemeanors,

 scores given by one group, the scores given by

 e.g. "disturbing the peace," or "being drunk

 the other group can be fairly well predicted. A  correlation of .89 indicates that such predic tions can be made with a high degree of

 in public places."

 Although the general ordering of the

 crimes accords with common sense expecta tions, it is still interesting to note where some

 accuracy.

 Another way of looking at consensus is to

 offenses fall in the ordering of crimes. For

 consider the regression equation that is the

 example, crimes involving action taken against

 "best" straight line that can be fitted to the

 police officers are almost always regarded as

 array of the average ratings given by a pair of

 more serious than similar actions taken against

 groups. The regression equations for race and

 others. Another tendency is for crimes involv-

 sex groups are shown below:

 ing persons known to the offender to be

 regarded as less serious than crimes committed

 Regression Equation for Whites on Blacks:

 against strangers: apparently respondents feel  that when a victim is known to the offender,  the offense is, in some sense, understandable

 Ywh =-.39 +.998XB1

 and possibly justified. Finally, it may be  noted that "white collar" crimes (e.g. embez-

 Regression Equation for Males on Females:

 YMale = - .80 + 1.059XFem

 zlement, and price gouging) and "crimes

 without victims" (e.g. homosexuality) are not

 As indicated by intercept values, on the

 regarded as particularly serious offenses.

 average, blacks tend to rate each crime as

 more serious than whites by .4 units and

 The Question of Consensus:

 females tend to rate crimes more serious by .8

 units. The overall agreement between the

 The usefulness of the ratings in Table 1

 races and the sexes rests largely on agreement

 rests heavily on the extent to which signifi-

 about the relative seriousness of crimes, with  blacks and females regarding all crimes as

 cant subgroups in the general population agree

 with each other. If the disagreement is great,

 slightly more serious than their counterpart

 then the seriousness ratings reflect individual

 preference, conditioned perhaps by sub cultural norms, but certainly not generalized

 groups.

 A large variety of subgroups is of potential

 interest, but with so small a total sample, one

 social norms.

 can only compare a few of the more complex

 It is easier to assert that there should be

 228 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

 Table 1. Average Seriousness Ratings Given to 140 offenses in Baltimore Survey

 (N is at least 100)

 Rank Crime MIean Variance

 1 Planned killing of a policeman 8.474 2.002  2 Planned killing of a person for a fee 8.406 2.749

 3 Selling heroin 8.293 2.658

 4 Forcible rape after breaking into a home 8.241* 2.266

 S Impulsive killing of a policeman 8.214 3.077

 6 Planned killing of a spouse 8.113* 3.276

 7 Planned killing of an acquaintance 8.093 3.273

 8 Hijacking an airplane 8.072 2.776

 9 Armed robbery of a hank 8.021 8.020

 10 Selling LSD 7.949 3.048

 11 Assault with a gun on a policeman 7.938 3.225

 12 Kidnapping for ransom 7.930 3.844

 13 Forcible rape of a stranger in a park 7.909 3.737

 14 Killing someone after an argument over a business

 transaction 7.898 3.536

 15 Assassination of a public official 7.888 S.40n

 16 Killing someone during a serious argument 7.867 3.663  17 Making sexual advances to young children 7.861 3.741

 18 Assault with a gun on a stranger 7.847* 2.172

 19 Impulsive killing of a spouse 7.835 3.952

 20 Impulsive killing of a stranger 7.821* 3.429

 21 Forcible rape of a neighbor 7.778 3.726

 22 Impulsive killing of an acquaintance 7.717 4.205  23 Deliberately starting a fire which results in a death 7.707 4.189

 24 Assault with a gun on a stranger 7.662** 2.976*  25 Manufacturing and selling drugs known to be harmful

 to users 7.653 3.280

 26 Knowingly selling contaminated food which results

 in a death 7.S96 5.202

 27 Armed robbery of a company payroll 7.577 3.080

 28 Using heroin 7.S20 4.871  29 Assault with a gun on an acquaintance 7.SOS 3.482

 30 Armed holdup of a taxi driver 7.s0s 3.336

 31 Beating up a child 7.490 3.840

 32 Armed robbery of a neighborhood druggist 7.487* 3.221

 33 Causing auto accident death while driving when drunk 7.455 3.904  34 Selling secret documents to a foreign government 7.423* 5.722  35 Armed street holdup stealing S200 cash 7.414 3.633

 36 Killing someone in a bar room free-for-all 7.392 4.637

 37 Deliberately starting a fire in an occupied building 7.347 5.177

 38 Assault with a gun on a spouse 7.323 4.650

 39 Armed robbery of a supermarket 7.313 3.911  40 Assault with a gun in the course of a riot 7.245 3.218  41 Armed hijacking of a truck 7.198 3.866

 42 Deserting to the enemy in time of war 7.194 4.673

 43 Armed street holdup stealing $25 in cash 7.16S 4.431  44 Armed robbery of an armored truck 7.163 S.210  45 Spying for a foreign government 7.135 7.024

 46 Killing a pedestrian while exceeding the speed limit 7.122 3.964

 47 Seduction of a minor 7.021 S.729

 48 Beating up a policeman 7.020 5.734

 49 Selling marijuana 6.969* 7.216

 so Father-daughter incest 6.959 7.112

 51 Causing the death of an employee by neglecting to

 repair machinery 6.918 4.556

 52 Breaking and entering a bank 6.908 4.641

 53 Mugging and stealing $25 in cash 6.873* s.305

 54 Selling pep pills 6.867 S.683

 55 Cashing stolen payroll checks 6.827 4.784

 56 Mugging and stealing A 200 cash 6.796 s.05s

 57 Causing the death of a tenant by neglecting to

 repair heating plant 6.704 6.314

 58 Killing spouse's lover after catching them together 6.691 7.695

 59 Blackmail 6.667 5.122

 60 Advocating overthrow of the government 6.663 7.715

 61 Neglecting to care for own children 6.660 6.977

 62 Forcible rape of a former spouse 6.653 6.394

 63 Manufacturing and selling autos known to be

 dangerously defective 6.604 S.968  64 Beating up a stranger 6.604 5.379

 6S Using LSD 6.SS7 7.479

 66 Driving while drunk 6.S4s 6.006

 67 Practicing medicine without a license 6.SOn* 6.908  68 Burglary of a home stealing a color TV set 6.44n* S.048

 69 Knowingly passing counterfeit money 6.392 S.220

 70 Beating up someone in a riot 6.368 5.788

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES 229

 71 Performing illegal abortions 6.330 S.723

 72 Passing worthless checks for more than $S5O 6.309 5.119

 73 A public official accepting bribes in return for favors 6.240 6.467

 74 Employee embezzling company funds 6.207* S.030

 75 Knowingly selling stolen stocks and bonds 6.138* 4.960

 76 Refusing to obey lawful order of a policeman 6.118* S.806

 77 Burglary of a home stealing a portable transister radio 6.11S* 5.871

 78 Theft of a car for the purpose of resale 6.093* 5.085

 79 Knowingly selling defective used cars as completely safe 6.093 s.n23

 80 Burglary of an appliance store stealing several TV sets 6.n62 5.371

 81 Looting goods in a riot 6.043 S.0S2

 82 Knowingly selling stolen goods 6.021 4.463  83 Leaving the scene of an accident 5.949 6.620  84 Printing counterfeit $10 bills 5.948 6.820  8S Shoplifting a diamond ring from a jewelry store 5.939 5.466  86 Mother-son incest 5.907 9.189  87 Theft of a car for joy-riding 5.876 6.047  88 Intimidating a witness in a court case 5.8S3 4.8S0  89 Brother-sister incest 5.825 8.709

 90 Knowingly selling worthless stocks as valuable

 investments 5.821 5.021  91 Beating up a spouse 5.796 7.051  92 Selling liquor to minors 5.789 7.572  93 Burglary of a factory stealing machine tools 5.789 S.317  94 Using stolen credit cards 5.750 S.832  95 Using pep pills 5.656 9.512  96 Joining a riot 5.656 6.750  97 Lending money at illegal interest rates 5.653 S.775

 98 Knowingly buying stolen goods 5.596 5.794

 99 Refusal to serve when drafted in peace time 5.535 8.863  100 Resisting arrest 5.449 6.271  101 Impersonating a policeman 5.449 7.405  102 Using false identification to obtain goods from a store 5.438 6.628  103 Bribing a public official to obtain favors 5.394 6.198  104 Passing worthless checks involving less than $100 5.339* 5.921  105 Desertion from military service in peace time 5.323 7.526  106 Under-reporting income on income tax return 5.305 6.321  107 Willfully neglecting to file income tax returns 5.157* 6.470  108 Soliciting for prostitution S.144 7.687  109 Proposing homosexual practices to an adult S.14n 9.361  110 Overcharging on repairs to automobiles S.135 6.455  111 Shoplifting a dress from a department store S.n7n 6.308

 112 Beating up an acquaintance S.032 5.644

 113 Driving while license is suspended 5.031 7.988  114 Pburing paint over someone's car 4.938 7.449

 115 Shoplifting a pair of shoes from a shoe store 4.990 6.781

 116 Overcharging for credit in selling goods 4.970 6.213

 117 Shoplifting a carton of cigarettes from a supermarket 4.969 6.793

 118 Smuggling goods to avoid paying import duties 4.918 5.618

 119 Killing a suspected burglar in home 4.868* 8.930

 120 False claims of dependents on income tax return 4.832 6.801

 121 Knowingly using inaccurate scales in weighing meat

 for sale 4.786 s.9n2

 122 Refusal to make essential repairs to rental property 4.781 6.678

 123 Engaging in male homosexual acts with consenting adults 4.736 9.396  124 Engaging in female homosexual acts with consenting adults 4.729 9.042

 125 Breaking a plate glass window in a shop 4.653 6.697  126 Fixing prices of a consumer product like gasoline 4.629 6.069  127 Fixing prices of machines sold to businesses 4.619 6.218

 128 Selling pornographic magazines 4.526 7.826

 129 Shoplifting a book in a bookstore 4.424* 6.551

 130 Repeated refusal to obey parents 4.411 9.074  131 Joining a prohibited demonstration 4.323 6.486

 132 False advertising of headache remedy 4.083 7.972

 133 Refusal to pay alimony 4.063 6.670  134 Refusal to pay parking fines 3.583* 6.475  135 Disturbing the peace 3.779 7.174  136 Repeated truancy 3.573 7.6SR  137 Repeated running away from home 3.571* 6.342  138 Loitering in public places 3.375 8.111  139 Refusal to answer census taker 3.1ns 7.329

 140 Being drunk in public places 2.849 6.021

 NOTE: Scores have a range of 9 (most serious) to 1 (least serious).

 *Crimes rated by all members (200) of the Baltimore sample.

 **This offense was inadvertently repeated (see crime rank No. 18), indicating

 that differences in scores as much as .185 can be obtained through response

 unreliability.

 230 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

 Table 2. Correlations among Average Crime Ratings for Major Subgroups:

 Race, Sex, and Educational Attainment (N = 140)

 Subgroups Correlation n*=

 Blacks and whites .89** (100)

 Males and females .94** (100)

 Less than high school graduation and high

 school graduation or better .89** (96-104)

 *In this context, n denotes the number of respondents who rated each of the

 crimes. Note that for 20 of the crimes shown in Tahle 1, all respondents

 (200) contributed to the ratings. Hence, n refers to the number who rated all  but the common 20 crimes. Since the correlations were computed across all 140  pairs of average scores generated by each pair of subgroups, the essential N

 for each correlation is 140.

 **p < .01.

 subgroup combinations. In Table 3 correla tions are shown among subgroups defined by

 the comparisons are small. For example, the

 average ratings for relatively well educated  black males are based on samples of seven and

 the cross classification of sex, race and educa-

 eight. Given the small number of ratings over

 tional attainment. Eight subgroups in all are

 which these averages were computed, the  subgroup correlations must be considered

 created.

 Note that in Table 3 the numbers of

 persons in each subgroup who contribute

 quite high. The lowest correlation is .61 and

 individual ratings to the averages that go into

 the highest .93, the average of all the correla-

 Table 3. Correlations among Subgroup Means Computed for all 140 Crimes:

 Race, Educational Attainment, and Sex Subgroups (N = 14n)

 Subgroup

 Less than IHigh High School

 School Graduation Graduation or Better

 Black White Black White Black White Black White Overall  FemalesFemales Males Males Females Females Males Males Sample

 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)

 Less Bl Fem (1) .76 .70 .77 .74 .75 .78 .74 .86

 High Wh Fem (2) .61 .83 .76 .78 .77 .77 .88  Grad- Bl Male(3) .66 .65 .67 .63 .65 .77

 uate Wh Male(4) .73 .79 .79 .79 .90

 High Bl Fem (5) .78 .80 .74 .86  School Wh Fem (6) .83 .93 .94  uate Bl Male(7) 84 .90 orI.8 .9

 Better Wh M1ale(8) {93

 n*= [9] [14] [16-17] [18-19] [9-10] [17] [7-8] [18] [100]

 * "n" indicates the number of respondents. whose ratings contribute to the com puter averages. "n" can vary within a subgroup because of slight variations

 in the numbers of persons who were administered each of the two versions of  the basic questionnaire, each containing a different set of 60 crimes to he

 rated.

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES 231

 these differences will be taken up later in this

 tions among subgroups being .75. Note also

 that it is poorly educated black males who  disagree most with the other subgroups in the

 paper.

 What is Seriousness?

 sample, only one correlation involving this

 subgroup being as high as .70.  In the last column of Table 3, the correla-

 In asking the respondent to rate crimes, we  did not specify what was "seriousness." Nor  did we ask respondents what they meant by  their ratings. Obviously, respondents imparted  some meaning to the term, a meaning shared  sufficiently by others to produce the degree  of consensus reported above.

 tions are given for each subgroup's ratings  with the overall sample ratings. These correla-

 tions are high, above .86, except for poorly

 educated black males. In short, the eight

 subgroups defined by race, educational attain-

 ment, and sex do not vary much from the  ratings given by the total sample.

 We may never know what our respondents

 had in mind when they placed each card  bearing a description of an offense in a slot

 The correlations in Table 3 were computed

 over all 140 crimes. For a small subset of

 corresponding to their judgments. However,  we can reconstruct some of the principles that

 twenty crimes (marked by an asterisk in Table

 1) all two hundred respondents contributed to

 guided them by examining the way in which

 the ratings; and hence by considering this set  of crimes alone, we can double the number of

 characteristics of the crimes influenced their  ratings. We shall see that a very crude crime

 individual ratings used in computing subgroup

 classification system can account for a great

 average seriousness ratings. Doing so signifi-

 deal of variation from crime to crime in the

 cantly raises the correlations. None are below

 average ratings given.

 .70, and only three are below .80. The range is

 The crime classification system used was

 from .75 to .96, averaging .86. Furthermore,  the correlations of the subgroup ratings with  the ratings of the total sample are all above

 developed ad hoc by the senior author of this

 paper and applied by two researchers to each  crime. The system consists of the following

 .88.

 binary judgments applied to each offense:

 The subgroup in least agreement with the

 total sample consists of black males with less

 than high school education. Inspection of the

 1. Crimes Against the Person I: Murder,

 residuals of the regression of total sample

 manslaughter.

 means on the average seriousness scores of this  group suggests that the main points of dis agreement center around certain crimes

 2. Crimes Against the Person II: Assault,

 rape and incest.

 3. Crimes Against the Person III: All

 against the person, particularly those in which

 other crimes involving actual or threat-

 the offender and the victim are known to each

 ened personal injury exclusive of those

 other. For example, compared to the total  sample "beating up an acquaintance," is re garded much less seriously by poorly educated  black males. The line between manly sport

 shown above.

 4. Crimes Involving Property I: Cases in  which the value of goods involved was  more than $25.

 and crime can be thin indeed.

 5. Crimes Involving Property II: All other

 These findings are the only hint of sub-

 crimes involving property.

 cultural differences, along the lines of a

 6. Selling Illegal Drugs: Heroin, LSD,  Marijuana, Pep Pills.

 "subculture of violence" (cf. Wolfgang and,

 7. "White Collar Crimes": Embezzle-

 Ferracuti, 1967) or a lower class subculture

 ment, income tax cheating, fraudulent

 that defines certain acts quite differently (cf.

 business practices, etc.  8. "Victimless" Crimes: Prostitution, ho-

 Miller, 1968). Of course, one would want to

 see whether these findings would be replicated  in a larger sample of poorly educated black  males before accepting them as definitive

 mosexuality, etc.  9. Subversion (Crimes Against the

 State): Desertion, spying for enemy,

 evidence of subcultural differences.

 All told, the amount of consensus among

 etc.

 subgroup averages is impressive. Obviously,

 10. Crimes Involving Action Against Po-

 the correlations presented mask some differ-

 licemen:

 ences among the groups. The measurement of

 11. Crimes Involving Offenses Against

 232 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

 Table 4. Regression Analysis of Crime Characteristics and Mean

 Seriousness Ratings for 140 Crimes

 Dummy Variable Unstandardized Regression

 Coefficient

 1. Persons Crime I 1.92*

 2. Persons Crime II 1.73*

 3. Persons Crime III 1.12*

 4. Property Crime I .76*

 S. Property Crime II - .31

 6. Drug selling 1.82*

 7. White collar crimes - .09

 8. Victimless crimes .17

 9. Subversion .62*

 10. Crimes against police .40

 11. Crimes against order -1.92*

 Intercept 5.45

 R = .824*

 R2 = .68*

 *Indicates statistical significance at'.01 level or better.

 Order: Loitering, disturbing the peace,

 crimes such as "refusal to pay parking fines"

 etc.

 which would be coded "00000000000," the  estimated score for which is given by the  intercept value, 5.45. Thus a crime involving a  homicide is estimated by the regression equa-

 Each crime listed in Table 1 was given a code

 indicating the researchers' combined judgment

 whether it had one or more of the character-

 tion to receive the score of 7.37 (1.92 + 5.45),

 istics listed above. For example, "planned

 and a crime involving the homicide of a

 killing of a policeman" was coded

 policeman receives an estimated score of 7.77

 "10000000010," indicating that the crime  involved murder and was directed against a

 (1.92 + .40 + 5.45).

 The extent to which the eleven character istics "account" for the mean seriousness

 policeman. Although most of the crimes fell

 into only one of the categories distinguished

 scores given to the crimes is measured by the

 above, a minority were classified, as in the

 multiple correlation coefficient, .824, a figure

 example given, in more than one category.  Using the codes as dummy variables, a

 which indicates that a relatively large amount

 (68%o) of the variation from crime to crime in

 multiple regression was run in which the mean

 average seriousness can be accounted for by

 crime seriousness rating was the dependent

 these characteristics.5

 variable. The results are shown in Table 4. The

 These regression coefficients can be said to

 unstandardized regression coefficients are

 represent the way the sample collectively

 shown for each of the eleven binary (or

 "dummy") variables listed above. These coef-

 ficients have a specific meaning; they repre sent the estimated increment in average rating

 'This value depends in part on the particular mix

 of crimes in the set of 140, a different set - for

 example, one containing more crimes against prop-

 received by a crime with those characteristics.  The increment is given in relation to crimes

 erty - would generate a smaller or larger correlation  coefficient. It is unlikely, however, that the coef-

 that have none of the characteristics repre sented in the eleven binary variables, i.e.

 ficient would decline or increase much for a compar-

 ably sized set of crimes.

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES 233

 reacted to the characteristics of the crimes in

 thresholds concerning what is or is not to be  regarded as a highly serious crime. Some  subgroups may regard crime less seriously  than other subgroups. We have already seen in  Table 2 that females and blacks have a lower

 question. Hence they provide clues to the

 collective process of judgment. This interpre-

 tation makes it clear that crimes against

 persons and drug selling are regarded as  especially heinous; whereas crimes involving  only property are not markedly different from

 threshold of seriousness respectively, than

 males or whites.

 the base crimes. However, crimes "against  order" are not viewed as particularly serious,

 To pursue this line of analysis, mean

 seriousness ratings were computed for each of  the crimes for each of the subgroups we  wanted to distinguish. For example, in study-

 as indicated by the large negative regression  coefficient for the eleventh variable.

 Note that certain types of crimes are

 ing the effects of age, sex and race simulta-

 neously, we divided the sample into eight

 regarded as not particularly distinguishable

 from the base crimes, in particular "white

 subgroups based on the cross classification of

 these three characteristics.7 Average ratings  were computed for each of the 140 crimes,

 collar crimes" and "victimless crimes." Our  respondents do not see these offenses as  particularly serious.

 leading to a total of 1,120 average seriousness  ratings (eight subgroups times 140 crimes).

 The findings of this section can be sum marized in two statements: First, it is clear

 Regression analyses were then run using sub-

 that collectively6 respondents were reacting

 group membership as a dummy variable.

 The results of the analyses using race and  sex in combination with each of three other

 to the simple characteristics of the crimes

 they rated, as indicated by the fact that these

 variables are shown in Table 5. Note that the

 eleven binary variables account for so much

 variation in the mean ratings given. Second,

 regression coefficients in that table have ex-

 actly the same meaning as those shown in  Table 4: That is, they represent the estimated

 crimes against persons and illegal drug selling  are seen as especially serious offenses, com pared to crimes against property.

 increment (or decrement) in seriousness that a  crime receives when rated by members of a  subgroup. Thus, the coefficient .68 shown for  young black females, indicates that a crime

 Subgroup Variation in Mean Seriousness

 Ratings:

 "typically" receives .68 of a unit more when

 Earlier in this paper, we found considerable

 it is rated by a young black female. The base  against which the increment (or decrement) is

 agreement on the ordering of crime serious ness among subgroups of the sample defined

 compared is the estimated rating given by  white males8 who have respectively the char acteristics of being old, of high prestige,

 by cross classifying race, sex and educational

 attainment. However, subgroups can still dif-

 fer in the extent to which they consider the

 highly educated, and not victimized.

 entire set of crimes to be more or less serious.  We now turn to this question.

 Each of the subgroups distinguished in the

 first column of Table 5 adds to the average  crime ratings (as compared with the base). In

 Subgroups of a sample may have different

 short being black, female, or younger leads to

 a generally higher seriousness rating over all  the crimes. The amount of the increment

 6 term "collective judgments" has been used

 throughout this section to indicate that we have

 varies, being least (and statistically insignifi-

 been treating average ratings given by the entire,

 sample and not ratings given by individuals. We can  anticipate that an individual level of analysis in

 which we try to predict the reactions of individuals

 'The sample size is too small to allow finer than

 to crime seriousness on the basis of the character-

 istics of crimes may turn out to be quite different.

 dichotomous distinctions in age, occupation, or

 At minimum, we can expect that the total amount  of variation "explained" will be considerably less  since individual idiosyncrasies ironed out by the use  of averages would have a chance to appear in the  data. At maximum, we might find that the judgment

 education, as the n's in Table 3 illustrate.

 'White males of higher status (older age, higher

 occupation, and higher education) in every analysis  in this section have been taken as the base against  which the other subgroups would be compared, a  decision made on the basis of the high level of

 processes require quite a different equation, al-

 though that does seem unlikely. See last section for

 agreement between upper status males and the

 an individual level analysis.

 overall average ratings given by the sample.

 234 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

 Table 5. Regression of Mean Crime Ratings on Subgroups Defined by Race, Sex and

 Age, Education, Occupational Prestige, and Victimization

 Unstandardized Regression Coefficients

 Race Sex With With With With

 Age Education Occupational Victimization

 Prestige

 Black Female .68* .99* .90* V .34*

 Y I

 White Female 0 .73* L 1.02* L .89* C .85*

 U 0 n T

 Black Male N .78* W 1.28* W .86* .39*

 G U1

 White Male .12 .09 - .06 - .17

 Black Female .91 .61* H .24* .75*

 0 ~ ~ HN 0 I ~ ~ I  White Female L .87* C .68* C .65* 0 .70*

 D H H T

 Black Female 1.00* .27* .66* .88*

 Intercept 5.68 6.30 5.75 5.76

 R = .24* .28* .25* .23*

 NOTE: "Young" is defined as below 45.

 "Low Eiducation" is defined as less than high school graduation.

 "Low Occupational Prestige" is defined as NORC prestige score of 36.3 or

 less.

 "Victimization" is defined as having been the victim of at least one  crime over the past 2 years.

 *Indicates statistical significance at p = .01 or less.

 ratings compared to higher socioeconomic

 cant) for young white males and greatest  (1.00) for older black males.

 status males. Similarly, lower educated re-

 spondents generate seriousness averages which  are higher than those of the better educated.

 The correlation coefficients at the bottom  of Table 5 measure the extent to which the

 None of these subgroup characteristics

 combination of subgroup characteristics "ac-

 accounts for much total variation between

 counts" for the total variation among the

 average crime ratings, compared to the over-

 1,120 average crime seriousness ratings. The

 arching influence of the characteristics of the

 correlations are modest, (.23-.28) indicating

 crime being rated.

 that about 5% to 7% of the variance among

 In the extreme right hand column of Table

 mean ratings is "accounted" for.9

 5, we turn to a last subgroup characteristic,  experience with crime as a victim. The data  come from a question asking whether or not  respondents or members of their households

 Similar findings are shown in the next two  columns of Table 5 for subgroups defined by  educational attainment and the prestige rating  of the occupation of the head of the house (a  reasonable measure of socio-economic status).

 had been victims of any crime during the year

 (1972) of the survey.' 0

 Persons from lower socioeconomic level

 The findings of the regression analysis  shown appear to be inconclusive. All but one

 households have higher average seriousness

 'Because each subgroup rated the same crimes,

 ' 0Professional victimization researchers will find

 the crime characteristics are held constant implicitly  in these calculations. Hence, although adding crime

 our method for measuring victimization far from

 adequate for any purposes other than very crude  measurement. Obviously we were not trying to  estimate the extent of victimization in Baltimore,  but mainly trying to get at a possible experiential

 characteristics to the regression equations of Table  5 will lead to an increased amount of explained

 variance, the regression coefficients for subgroups

 remain unchanged (except for slight rounding differ-

 component in crime seriousness ratings.

 ences).

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES 235

 ments with the general ordering of crimes  given by the total sample. For example, some  individuals may place all crimes against

 of the victimized groups regard crimes as more

 serious than non-victimized white males, but  so do the non-victimized groups. Indeed, since

 property higher than crimes against persons.

 the regression coefficients in the bottom three  subgroups tend to be slightly higher than in  the top three subgroups, one might infer that  being victimized leads to a slightly lower

 In part, these differences represent "error,"

 possibly created by misunderstanding the rat-

 ing task, not being familiar with the vocabu lary used in the crime descriptions, by re-

 collective view of the seriousness of crimes in

 spondents making mistakes in placing cards in

 general.

 The findings of this section indicate that

 the spaces intended, or by interviewers mak-

 subgroup characteristics contribute only mod erately to the overall ratings of crime serious-

 ing mistakes in gathering the cards from the

 slots in which they were placed. As long as  such "errors" are not systematically related to  some characteristics of individuals or of the  criminal acts being rated, they will tend to be  ironed out in computing averages for sub-

 ness. Indeed, of the regression coefficients for

 subgroups in Table 5 the largest is 1.27 and

 the average is .45 (computed without regard

 to sign), indicating that varying the mixture of  subgroups will not affect the vignette average

 groups. To the extent that individual differ-

 ratings by much. In other words, if all the  raters were composed of the average sub-

 ences are based on value differences, the

 analysis in Table 3 would tend to pick up such

 differences provided they were correlated

 group, the ratings shown in Table 1 would

 with the subgroup characteristics used.

 vary at most by less than half a unit on the

 The mode of analysis of individual differ-

 rating scale.

 ences used below is particularly sensitive to

 The implications of these findings are quite

 individual differences that lead to an individ ual's ratings differing from those of the total  sample. Such differences may be either gen-

 important: because subgroups vary so little

 from each other, the fact that our sample is

 not representative does not seem to be a fatal

 erated by "error" in the sense used above or

 flaw. For example, our Baltimore sample is

 generated by more systematic biases. The

 37% black, more than twice the national  percentage for the United States as a whole.

 analysis attempted here is not sensitive to

 differences between the two sources of indi-

 However, since blacks add as a group .8 to the

 vidual differences.

 average seriousness score, this over-representa tion adds to the scores of seriousness only .05

 To obtain a measure of the degree to which  individual respondents agreed with each other,

 scale units compared to scores computed if we

 weight blacks according to national racial  proportions. Furthermore, since blacks tend

 a correlation was computed between each  respondent's ratings and the average ratings

 to agree quite closely with whites (r = .89) on

 given by the entire sample. Thus for each

 the relative ordering of scores, the scores may  be inflated slightly (.05) by the over-repre sentation of blacks; but the resulting scores

 respondent, the scores given to the eighty

 criminal act descriptions he or she rated were  paired off with the average ratings given to  those acts by the entire Baltimore sample.

 may still be used with little error to order

 crimes according to their seriousness.

 Of the two hundred correlations so com-

 puted, 195 (98%) were positive, covering a  range from -.78 to .86. The average correla-

 Individual Differences in Crime Seriousness

 Ratings:

 tion was .54, with a standard deviation of

 The overall large amounts of agreement

 .23.1 1 In short, even on the individual level  where we can expect to find idiosyncratic  factors at work, there is a great deal of

 among subgroups tends to obscure the fact of

 individual differences in crime seriousness

 ratings. Around each of the means used above  is some degree of individual variation. Indeed,

 X Four of the five negative correlations were

 it is possible to have a great deal individual

 smaller (in absolute terms) than .10, and hence are

 essentially zero or close to it. The single high

 variation and still have considerable between

 negative correlation (-.7 8) most likely resulted  either from the respondent reversing the meaning of

 subgroup consensus.

 It is to these individual differences that we

 the scale or an error on the part of the interviewer in

 now turn. In part, differences among individ uals may arise from individual value disagree-

 keeping the sorted cards in the respondent's in-

 tended order.

 236 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

 agreement between individuals and the t6tal  sample. Indeed, given the amount of inter-sub-

 A variable measuring the interaction be-

 tween race and education did achieve statis-

 group consensus, it would be surprising to

 tical significance at the .05 level indicating  that for blacks education was less determina-

 find otherwise.

 This finding is not an artifact of arithmetic.  Although each individual contributes to the

 tive of agreement with the total sample. In  short, among whites the more education, the  more likely they were to agree at a rate of

 averages computed, his contribution is not  enough to more than negligibly influence  these averages. For 120 of the crimes, each  respondent is only one of one hundred indi-

 increment greater than that for blacks.

 None of the other variables included in the

 regression reached statistical significance,

 viduals whose ratings are used; and for the  remaining twenty criminal acts he is but one

 indicating that socioeconomic status, race,

 sex, and victimization did not contribute  enough independently to register as statistical-

 of two hundred individuals involved.

 One can get some understanding of the

 ly significant.

 sources of agreement with general consensus

 These findings suggest strongly that educa-

 by using each individual's R2 as a dependent  variable and calculating the extent to which

 tional attainment is the major determinant of

 agreement. A reasonable interpretation is that  educational attainment fosters a more ac-

 characteristics of individuals can account for

 the degree of agreement so measured. Table 6

 curate cognition of the normative structure of

 contains the results of a multiple regression

 society. The process can be viewed as twofold.

 analysis using each individual's R2 as the

 First, exposure to the normative structure of  the society is a concomitant of formal instruc-

 dependent variable. Six individual character-

 istics were used in the regression; however,

 tion. Second, educational attainment reflects

 only two variables produced significant (at the

 skills in handling verbal and written communi-

 .01 level) standardized regression coefficients,

 cation, the use of which in the years after

 educational attainment and age. The more  educated the respondent, the more likely he  or she was to agree with the total sample  average. Similarly, the younger the respon-

 school completion reinforces knowledge of  the normative structure. Reading newspapers,

 magazines, and listening or viewing provides

 continual cues to societal evaluations of crimi nal acts. This interpretation is bolstered by

 dent, the more likely he or she. was to agree

 with the sample average.

 the finding that age is also a determinant of

 Table 6. Regression of Individual R2 on Selected Individual Characteristics*

 (N = 200)

 Standardized Beta

 Individual Characteristic Coefficient

 Educational attainment (5 categories) .48**

 Age (years) -.l9*

 Interaction (race and education) -.18**

 Sex (dummy variable: 1 = female) .09

 NORC prestige score of household head -.08

 Race (dummy variable: 1 = Black) -.07  Victimization (dummy variable: 1 = victimized in past year) .03

 R = .548**

 R2 = . 300**

 *Dependent variable is R2 computed for each respondent between respondents'

 scores and average scores for entire Baltimore sample.

 **Significant at .01 or better.

 ***Significant at .05.

 THE SERIOUSNESS OF CRIMES 237

 agreement with societal consensus: The

 high and low socioeconomic levels, and

 younger the respondent, and therefore the  closer in time to formal educational exper-

 among levels of educational attainment. Sec-

 ond, there is strong evidence that whether an

 ience, the more the individual respondent is

 individual's ratings of crimes agree with the

 likely to agree with the sample consensus.

 general normative trends depends heavily on

 formal educational attainment, suggesting that

 exposure to the normative structure and

 Conclusions:  Building on the pioneering work of Sellin

 language handling ability lead to better knowl-

 edge of the normative structure.

 and Wolfgang (1964) this study is an exten-

 sion to a more representative population and  attempts a more detailed analysis of certain

 REFERENCES

 salient characteristics of crime seriousness

 D. D. Akman, A. Normandeau and S. Turner  1967 "The measurement of delinquency in Can-

 ratings.

 ada." The Journal of Criminal Law, Crim-

 Using a sample survey undertaken in Balti-

 inology and Police Science 58 (Sept.):  330-7.

 more in 1972, in which two hundred adults  rated 140 descriptions of criminals according

 J. P. McConnell and J. D. Martin

 to how "serious" the respondents believed the

 1969 "Judicial attitudes and public morals."

 American Bar Association Journal 55  (Dec.): 1129-3 3.

 acts to be, average ratings were constructed

 for each crime and for subgroups of the  sample. In addition, an analysis was under-

 Miller

 1958 "Lower class culture as a generating milieu

 taken of the determinants of individual levels

 of gang delinquency." J. Soc. Issues 14

 of agreement with the total sample.

 (3) ;5-19.

 A. Normandeau

 Three sets of findings may be viewed as  strongly supported in the resulting data: First,

 1966 "The measurement of delinquency in

 Montreal." The Journal of Criminal Law,

 there is considerable agreement from sub group to subgroup on the relative ordering of

 Criminology and Police Science 57  (June): 172-7.

 the criminal acts rated and on the relative

 G. N. G. Rose

 1966 "Concerning the measurement of delin quency." The British Journal of Crim-

 "distance" between such acts on the scale

 used.

 inology 6 (Oct.):414-18.  Sellin and M. W. Wolfgang

 Second, a small number of characteristics

 of the crimes account for a large proportion  of the variation from crime to crime in the

 1964 The Measurement of Delinquency. New

 York: John Wiley & Sons.  S. Sudman

 average rating given to the acts in question.

 1967 Reducing the Cost of Surveys, Chicago:

 Third, the more highly educated and the

 The Aldine Publishing Co.  A. Velez-Diaz and E I. Megargee

 younger respondents were, the more likely

 were their individual ratings of criminal acts

 "An investigation of differences in value

 to agree with the average computed for the

 judgments between youthful offenders  and non-offenders in Puerto Rico." J. of  Crim. Law, Criminology and Police Sci ence 61 (Dec.) 549-53.

 entire sample.

 These findings greatly support the follow-

 ing generalizations: First, the norms defining

 how serious various criminal acts are con-

 Wolfgang and Ferracuti  1967 The Subculture of Violence. Social Sci ence Paperbacks: London.

 sidered to be, are quite widely distributed

 among blacks and whites, males and females,

