J Exp Criminol (2019) 15:103–113 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292-017-9318-y

The usefulness of a crime harm index: analyzing the Sacramento Hot Spot Experiment using the California Crime Harm Index (CA-CHI)

Renée J. Mitchell1

Published online: 16 December 2017 # Springer Science+Business Media B.V., part of Springer Nature 2017

Abstract

Objectives This study introduces the California Crime Harm Index (CA-CHI) and explores in what context a Crime Harm Index is a meaningful measure, comparing crime count outcomes to the CA-CHI. I decouple violent and property crime to determine when harm is a better indicator of reduction rather than counts.

Methods The Sacramento Hot Spot Experiment (SHSE) was a 90-day randomized controlled trial testing the effectiveness of 15-minute high-visibility police patrols to high crime and call for service hot spots. In this paper, I translate Part I crimes counts into the CA-CHI. I conduct t tests for both Part I crime and CA-CHI between experimental and control hot spots. Effect sizes are calculated to observe the differences between Part I crime and CA-CHI. Part I crimes were decoupled into violent and property crime and similarly analyzed.

Results The SHSE’s effect size using the decoupled violent and property crime CACHI as the outcome measures was less than when the Part I crime counts were analyzed. Violent crime had too small a sample size to properly analyze.

Conclusions The impact of the SHSE is not as strong when using the CA-CHI to evaluate crime outcomes compared to crime counts. The reduction in harm is driven largely by the property crime reductions. The sensitivity of the CA-CHI is reduced when violent crime is excluded. The CA-CHI or any derivation of a CHI may not be a useful tool when using a harm index on a small study, dataset, or municipality.

Keywords Automatic vehicle locate(AVL) . California crime harm index . Crime harm index . Crime counts . Hot spots . Randomized controlledtrials . Policing

* Renée J. Mitchell Renee.mitchell@fulbrightmail.org

1 University of Cambridge, Institute of Criminology, Sidgwick Ave, Cambridge, CB3, UK

Introduction

Harm indexes are a relatively new measure quantifying crime. These harm indexes take into consideration harm the police cause (Ratcliffe 2015), the sentence an offender received (Francis et al. 2005), and the victim’s opinion (Ignatans and Pease 2015), yet only one (Ariel et al. 2016) has applied an index as an experimental measure. This index was the Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI), which was created by Sherman

- (2013) to reflect three things: the democratic values of the public, a reliable measure, and no cost adoptability. Here, a California Crime Harm Index (CA-CHI) was modeled after the CHI and applied to a previously reported randomized controlled trial of hot spots policing. It demonstrates how the CA-CHI creates a more detailed picture of crime only when there is enough violent crime to produce the nuances of CHI models. This has implications for future CHI research.


Harm indexes

Harm indexes lack a broad base of research, as it is a relatively new approach to evaluating policing interventions. Prior research has examined calls for service and reported crime counts, sometimes divided into crime categories or call type, to evaluate police interventions. These evaluations have all used crime counts as outcome measures, treating each event as equal to all others (Sherman 2013). Several harm indexes have been created based on different evaluations of society’s view of harm. Sherman et al. (2016) captioned them:

- 1. Sentencing gravity score (Ratcliffe 2015)
- 2. Assessment of harm framework (Greenfield and Paoli 2013)
- 3. Crime victim survey score (Ignatans and Pease 2015)
- 4. Court records approach (Francis et al. 2005)
- 5. Cambridge Crime Harm Index (Sherman 2007, 2013; Sherman et al. 2016).


Harm as intended in this article encapsulates the erosion of trust that crime produces in a community and the injury it causes into the definition. The harm indexes described by Sherman et al. (2016) reflect this definition of harm in their metric.

Why crime harm indexes need ease of application

Policing practices should be based on theory, but when the integration of a theory prevents a practice from being implemented as a standard, a simpler way must be found. Each of the harm indices other than Sherman’s (2013) requires substantial effort by a police organization to apply. Greenfield and Paoli described their harm index as Bdaunting^ to apply as it uses Bwithin-activity^ harm, which is difficult to measure (Greenfield and Paoli 2013, p. 883). Others require outside metrics such as sentencing records or gravity score (Francis et al. 2005: Ratcliffe 2015) or victim surveys (Ignatans and Pease 2015). A police agency would require extensive training to translate their crime data into one of the prior indexes, which does not support ease of teaching or application.

Police agencies have constantly changing demands that in some cases may require immediate attention, which means that, for a practice to become standard in policing, the application cannot be overly complicated. Sherman et al. (2016) suggest an approach for the sustainability of a CHI. They proposed a 3-prong test for making a rapid transition of a Crime Harm Index to standard practice (Sherman et al. 2016, p. 4):

- 1. Does the metric reflect the resolution of conflicting viewpoints by a process adopted by a democratic government reflecting the will of the people (the Bdemocracy test^)?
- 2. Does the metric provide a reliable measure that can be consistently applied to each unit of analysis—time, place, people—with the same results for the same levels of harm (the Breliability test^)?
- 3. Is the metric readily available at virtually no cost to be adopted without any new budgetary appropriation (the Bcost test^)?


Without passing these three tests, a standard metric will most likely not be adopted in policing. Reliability and ease are probably the two most important factors for police to adopt an innovation. Police do not have time to translate crime counts into a complicated metric. The CHI is an approach that is cost effective, easy to teach and apply, and is based on democratic values; it is a simple index that could benefit policing (Sherman 2007, 2013; Sherman et al. 2016).

Evaluating hot spot studies using a Crime Harm Index

Ariel et al. (2016) were the first to use a CHI to evaluate a hot spot experiment and estimate the cost effectiveness of crime prevention measures. The CHI was used to determine how many prison days were prevented, thereby giving a price estimate on how much money was saved on prison days. However, the CHI was not used to determine whether the measure was more or less sensitive than a crime count. Using CHI to evaluate hot spot studies can determine if the conclusions are sensitive to whether the outcome is measured by the counts of reported crime or a CHI calculated from reported crimes alone. If a CHI is not a more sensitive measure than crime counts for a randomized controlled trial then what use could a CHI offer (Sherman 2007; Sherman et al. 2016)? All the hot spot studies to date, except Ariel et al. (2016), have evaluated the effectiveness of the intervention based on calls for service (Sherman et al. 1989; Sherman and Weisburd 1995; Weisburd and Green 1995) or crime counts (Braga et al. 1999; Sherman and Rogan 1995). Although the success of reducing crime and calls for service in hot spot studies is well supported, if these studies were evaluated with the CHI we may find hot spot policing is even more or less effective than we once believed.

Context of Study

The study was conducted at the Sacramento Police Department. Sacramento, a city located in Northern California, consistently ranks as one of the highest crime and traffic accident rates of large cities in California and has a higher

yearly crime average than other cities in the United States (Sacramento, CA 2014). The SHSE took place over a 90-day period from February 11 to May 11, 2011. The Part I crime data from the SHSE was translated into a California Crime Harm Index (CA-CHI) and compared to the Part I crime outcomes.

Method

Sacramento Hot Spots Experiment (SHSE)

The Sacramento Hot Spot Experiment was a 90-day randomized controlled trial testing a policy of visiting high crime and call for service hot spots for 15 minutes of high-visibility patrol multiple times per day. The officers were given a daily randomized order in which to visit their treatment hot spots every 2 h between 0900 and 0100 hours; the control hot spots received a standard police response. The hot spots were selected using 2 years of call for service data and 1 year of Part I crime data (see Telep et al. 2014 for pairing method). Additionally, the outcome measures were subjected to a t test for both Part I crime and CA-CHI, and neither had any statistically significant differences at baseline.

The original analysis reported in Telep et al. (2014) collected three primary dependent variables: calls for service, Part I crime incidents, and soft crime incidents during the study period, the same time period the previous year, and the average of the same time period over the three previous years, over a 24-h period (see Telep et al. 2014). This article uses the Part I crime data comparing the baseline of the previous year to the study period.

The analysis included difference-in-difference testing for both Part I crime and CACHI between the experimental and control hot spots; effect sizes were calculated to observe the changes when translating Part I crime to the CA-CHI. Part I crimes were decoupled into violent and property crime categories to examine the difference-indifference results when translating Part I crime into a CA-CHI and to compare effect sizes.

California Crime Harm Index

Typically, hot spot studies are analyzed using counts of one or more of the following outcomes: Part I crimes, soft crimes, disorder, drug crimes, violent crimes and amalgamate by type making all crimes equal (Braga and Bond 2008; Sherman and Weisburd 1995; Taylor et al. 2011). Comparing a reduction of aggressive panhandling to robbery would not be an accurate comparison because a robbery is a traumatic experience compared to the annoyance of aggressive panhandling. Instead of grouping the outcome variables, here Sherman’s (2013) suggestion was followed and the CA-CHI was created based on the Cambridge CHI model.

An index creates equivalency across disparate variables. The CA-CHI does this by giving every category of crime a weight—in potential maximum prison days. As Sherman et al. (2016) recommends, this study employs sentencing statutes

rather than guidelines, derived from the California Penal Code. This source provides the maximum sentences for each crime type. The sentencing guidelines reflect society’s determination of the severity of offense, thus the CA-CHI indicates how harmful a crime is to Californians.

While the maximum sentence an offender can receive in California is not the typical sentence, it is a consistent starting point for analyzing the relative harm of crimes across places (as well as across offenders and victims). Additionally, even though offenders can receive longer sentences due to previous offending, previous offending does not affect the amount of harm inflicted on society (Kleinig 1978). Therefore, even though an offender could receive a life sentence for a homicide due to prior offending, this will not be taken into consideration for the CA-CHI for two reasons: an offender’s record does not increase harm, and California does not keep publicly accessed sentencing data.

Modeling the CA-CHI on the Cambridge CHI allows for the comparison of crime statistics as a group without losing the variance of harm some crimes cause compared to others high-volume/low-harm or low-volume/high-harm. The Cambridge CHI determines meaningful harm, which may be a better tool with which to evaluate crime statistics, or at minimum presents another view of crime (Sherman 2007). The CA-CHI follows the five steps of Sherman’s suggestions in The Rise of Evidence-Based Policing: Targeting, Testing, and Tracking to create the CA-CHI and uses the maximum number of prison days instead of the median as suggested:

- 1. Counting up the number of crimes of each type in the area;
- 2. Multiplying the count for each type by the maximum number of prison days recommended for crimes of that type by first offenders;
- 3. Calling the product of that multiplication (crime count for a crime type × maximum days in prison) the HST for the crime type (for harm subtotal of days of prison for that offense type);
- 4. Repeating steps 1, 2, and 3 for every type of crime recorded for the area or person
- 5. Summing up all HSTs to yield the total crime harm.


The total crime harm was calculated for each of the control and treatment SHSE hot spots and assigned an index score. The CA-CHI only includes the crimes that occurred in the hot spots. The CA-CHI does not include drug offenses, as the general view is that officers usually generate this offense; officer proactivity cannot serve as both an independent and dependent variable (Sherman et al. 2016). The Cambridge CHI uses the starting points for sentencing. California sentencing guidelines do not use starting points, as such the CACHI was created using maximum possible sentencing days. Sentencing guidelines in California range from months to years, with some crimes having 3, 6 or 9 months as a sentencing guideline. A month varies from 28-31 days; to translate crimes carrying either multiple months or multiple year sentences the CA-CHI translates 1 month to 30 days and 1 year to 360 days. The Appendix presents the maximum penalty for each of the crime types occurring in the hot spots during the SHSE. Although the CA-CHI appears truncated in that homicide is only 2.5 times more harm than a burglary, other accepted crime harm indexes are as well (see Ratcliffe 2015, p. 5).

Results

I present results below for crime counts of the SHSE previously reported in Telep et al.

- (2014), the translation of Part I crime into the CA-CHI and a new analysis of crime count by crime category (violent and property). Rather than analyzing the data by pairs, it is analyzed as a pooled analysis, making the statistical test more conservative. The difference between the experimental and control groups at baseline was not statistically significant for Part I crime counts or the CA-CHI using a two-tailed test. Because of the comparability at baseline, I use t tests for difference-in-difference comparisons to determine the change between the baselines in 2010 to the experimental period in 2011, comparing the treatment group changes to the control group. These t tests are presented as a one-tailed test, as the SHSE was originally analyzed (Telep et al. 2014). This approach is reasonable as hot spot policing has yet to show a backfire effect and there is a considerable amount of research showing hot spots policing is an effective intervention (National Research Council 2004, p. 250). Table 1 presents the means and standard deviations of the Part I crime and CA-CHI in the treatment and control groups. Part I crime


Telep et al. (2014) found that there was a 25% decrease (140 to 105) in Part I crime incidents in the experimental area and a 27.37% increase (95 to 121) in the control area when comparing the study to the baseline period. This outcome was statistically significant (p = .012) in a one-tailed test. There was a decline on average of 1.67 Part I crime incidents in the experimental area compared to an increase of 1.24 incidents in the control when comparing the study to the baseline period. Part I crime showed a medium effect between the experimental and control groups [d = .7084, CI (.0849, 1.332), v = .1012]. The results presented in Table 2 are a one-tailed test t test.

California Crime Harm Index

The CA-CHI showed slightly smaller differences than Part I crime. There was a 22.80% decrease in harm in the experimental area compared to a 23.98% increase in

- Table 1 Descriptive statistics for Part I crime and CA-CHI in treatment versus control hot spots


Variable Means Standard Deviations

Treatment Control Treatment Control (n = 21) (n = 21) (n = 21) (n = 21)

- 2010 Part I Crime 6.667 4.524 7.164 5.591 CA-CHI 4917.143 3282.857 3513.382 3894.372
- 2011 Part I Crime 5 5.761 5.857 6.549 CA-CHI 3794.286 4037.143 3790.98 3527.987


- Table 2 Part I crime and CA-CHI t tests

Test Mean SD SEM tc p (one-tailed)

Difference-in-difference Part I crime −2.905 5.458 1.191 −2.439 0.012 CA-CHI −2448.57 4561.505 1213.697 −2.2956 0.025

- Table 3 Part I and CA-CHI t tests for property and violent crime


the control area when comparing the study to the baseline period. The experimental area showed a decrease in harm of 23,580 prison days and the control area showed an increase of 15,840 prison days. This outcome was statistically significant (p = .025) in a one-tailed test displayed in Table 2. CA-CHI showed a medium effect between the experimental and control groups [d = .6226, CI (.0032, 1.2419), v = .0999], a slightly lower effect than Part I crime.

Property and Violent crime outcomes

The sensitivity of an index can only be evaluated by examining all the nuances of crime that affect the index. The purpose of the CA-CHI is to account for both high-volume/ low-harm crimes and low-volume/high-harm crimes to create a single bottom line (Sherman et al. 2016). The two categories can be divided into property and violent crime as property crime is typically high-volume/low-harm and violent crime, being rare, is low-volume/high-harm. Here property and violent crimes are separated, and the count and crime harm are compared. Table 3 displays the comparisons.

Interestingly, the crime count and CA-CHI for property crimes are statistically significant while the violent crime is not. This result is understandable as violent crime is a rare phenomenon. The violent crime count changed from 7 to 19 crimes in the treatment area and from 8 to 12 crimes in the control area from the baseline to the study period. The treatment had an increase of 8 violent crimes compared to the control area. The numbers are too small to determine any real meaning from the results, hence no statistical significance. The property crime is statistically significant for both the crime count and CA-CHI (p = .005, p = .047, respectively) for a one-tailed test. Property crime in the treatment area dropped from 133 to 86 crimes for a reduction of 35.34%, and the control area increased from 87 crimes to 109 for a 25.29% increase. The

Test Mean SD SEM t p (one-tailed)

Difference-in-difference Property Part I crime −3.29 4.87 1.208 −2.7202 0.005 CA-CHI 1611.43 4002.512 936.41 1.7209 0.047

Violent crime

Part I crime 0.19 1.601 0.378 0.504 0.309 CA-CHI 620 3217.328 696.763 0.89 0.189

differences in effect size between property crime count and CA-CHI was larger than the difference between total crime (d = .8395, d = .5311). The total crime effect size differences were (d = .7084, d = .6226). The larger difference in effect size between total crime count and CA-CHI is influenced by the nuances the CA-CHI presents when evaluating all crime counts. Separating the violent crime from the property crime diminishes the gradations of crime an index conveys.

Discussion

These findings are interesting for several reasons. Uncoupling the violent and property crime caused a decrease in the effect size of the CA-CHI compared to the crime count. This decrease demonstrates when an index is useful; it accounts for the degrees of crime committed in a city only when there is an adequate amount of crime for the CACHI to add to understanding. In this case, property crime drove the harm reduction and, without the added nuance of violent crime, the effects do not remain the same. Uncoupling property and violent crime led to a different understanding of the effects of the hot spot study, the crime issues in Sacramento, and when a CHI might not be useful.

In the original analysis, property and violent crime were not separately analyzed. Part I crimes were aggregated and analyzed. Part I crime counts decreased in the treatment area and increased in the control area. Uncoupling crime counts gave a better understanding of what was occurring in the SHSE. Although property crime decreased in the treatment areas during the study compared to baseline, violent crime increased by 171.43% while the control area only increased by 50%. The high visibility policing had an effect on high-volume/low-harm crimes like theft and did not have a discernible effect on violent crime (the sample size for violent crime was too small to find a statistically significant effect). This effect is apparent when the crime harm is calculated for property crime. The effect size difference between crime count and crime harm become much larger when translating property crime only. The effect size difference between crime count and CA-CHI for total Part I crime was d = .0858, whereas the effect size difference for property crime was d = .3084. The sensitivity of the CA-CHI is reduced when violent crime is excluded. Property crime is responsible for the large reductions. Disaggregating the crime demonstrates the nuances of harm between types of crime. The CA-CHI will only be an effective tool if the amount of crime is large and varied enough to show degrees of harm. The CA-CHI may not give a different picture of crime in a small city with relatively few instances of high-harm/low-volume crime as in this case; the crime count picture may be similar to crime harm.

Limitations

Harm indexes are a relatively new tool in criminal justice and have yet to be created or used effectively. The CA-CHI is a simple, inexpensive translational tool that a crime analyst could easily apply, without additional cost, to their mapping program to display a different crime narrative for command staff. Yet, in this case, the CA-CHI appears to be useful only to large datasets or municipalities. The CA-CHI follows Sherman et al.’s (2016) recommendations for ease of use, yet this approach may be too simple to give a

holistic picture of crime unless used for larger datasets with varying levels of crime. Furthermore, the CA-CHI is limited to California, which reduces its comparability of state-to-state crime unless the same index score is assigned across general crime types as in Ratcliffe (2015).

Conclusions

The CA-CHI (or any other CHI) as an analysis tool may only be useful when analyzing large datasets or municipalities. Violent crime is rare and more random than property crime, especially in smaller cities, making it difficult to see statistically significant results in a small sample size, as demonstrated in this article. This result makes it almost meaningless to uncouple property and violent crime when using a harm index on a small study, dataset, or municipality. The purpose of a crime index is to demonstrate the nuances of harm to create a different narrative of crime for command staff. The CACHI can show the variation of harm although not when excluding violent crime and the dataset is small. A future study could apply the CA-CHI to a small city to determine whether the CA-CHI is useful for this environment.

Appendix

- Table 4 Maximum penalty by days of imprisonment for the California Crime Harm Index by offense category


Code Description Minimum months

Median months

Maximum months

Maximum Days

187 Homicide 180 5400 211 Robbery 36 48 72 2160 212.5 Home Invasion 36 72 108 3240 215 Carjacking 36 60 108 3240 220 Assault with intent to rape 24 48 72 2160 243.2(A)(1) Battery school injury * * 12 360 243.3 Battery against taxi driver 16 24 36 1080 246 Shoot at inhabited house 36 60 84 2520 261 Rape 36 72 96 2880 273.5 Domestic Violence 24 36 48 1440 289 Rape 36 72 108 3240 417(a)(1) Brandishing firearm 16 24 36 1080 484 Petty theft * * 6 180 487 Grand theft 16 24 36 1080 666 Theft with priors * * 12 360 10851VC Stolen vehicle * * 12 360 1708 US Stolen mail * * 60 1800

Table 4 (continued) Code Description Minimum

months

Median months

Maximum months

Maximum Days

- 242(e)(1) Battery * * 12 360
- 243(d) Battery with serious bodily injury


24 36 48 1440

- 245(a)(1) AWDW great bodily injury 24 36 48 1440
- 245(a)(2) AWDW firearm 24 36 48 1440 273(a)(a) Child abuse 24 48 72 2160 288c(2) Oral copulation - force 36 72 96 2880 368(b)(1) Elder Abuse 24 36 48 1440 459 bus Burglary - business 16 24 36 1080 459 res Burglary - residence 24 48 72 2160 459 Veh Burglary - vehicle 16 24 36 1080 664/211 Attempt robbery 18 24 36 1080


664/459 bus

Attempt burglary - business 8 12 16 480

664/459 res Attempt burglary - residence 12 24 36 1080

*No minimum or median

References

Ariel, B., Weinborn, C., & Sherman, L. W. (2016). BSoft^ policing at hot spots do police community support officers work? A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1-41. Braga, A. A., & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized controlled trial*. Criminology, 46(3), 577 607.

Braga, A. A., Weisburd, D. L., Waring, E. J., Mazerolle, L. G., Spelman, W., & Gajewski, F. (1999). Problemoriented policing in violent crime places: a randomized controlled experiment*. Criminology, 37(3), 541–580. Francis, B., Soothill, K., Humphreys, L., & Bezzina, C. A. (2005). Developing measures of severity and

frequency of reconviction. Lancaster: Lancaster University Centre for Applied Statistics. Glass, G. V., McGaw, B., & Smith, M. L. (1981). Meta-Analysis in Social Research. London: Sage. Greenfield, V. A., & Paoli, L. (2013). A Framework to Assess the Harms of Crimes. British Journal of

Criminology, 53(5), 864–886. Ignatans, D., & Pease, K. (2015). Taking Crime Seriously: Playing the Weighting Game. Policing. https://doi.

org/10.1093/police/pav029. Kleinig, J. (1978). Crime and the Concept of Harm. American Philosophical Quarterly, 15(1), 27–36. National Research Council. (2004). Fairness and effectiveness in policing: The evidence. Washington, DC:

The National Academies Press Ratcliffe, J. H. (2015). Towards an Index for Harm-Focused Policing. Policing, 9(2), 164–183. Sacramento,CA. (2014). Retrieved from www.city-data.com/sacramento Sherman, L. (2007). The Power Few Hypothesis: Experimental Criminology and the Reduction of Harm.

Journal of Experimental Criminology, 3, 299–321. Sherman, L. (2013). The Rise of Evidence-Based Policing: Targeting, Testing and Tracking. Crime and Justice, 42, 377–343. Sherman, L. W., & Rogan, D. P. (1995). Effects of gun seizures on gun violence: BHot spots^ patrol in Kansas City. Justice Quarterly, 12(4), 673 693. Sherman, L. W., & Weisburd, D. (1995). General deterrent effects of police patrol in crime Bhot spots^: A randomized, controlled trial. Justice Quarterly, 12(4), 625 648.

Sherman, L. W., Gartin, P. R., & Buerger, M. E. (1989). Hot spots of predatory crime: Routine activities and the criminology of place. Criminology, 27(1), 27 56. Sherman, L., Neyroud, P. W., & Neyroud, E. (2016). The Cambridge Crime Harm Index: Measuring Total Harm from Crime Based on Sentencing Guidelines. Policing, 10(3), 1 13. Taylor, B., Koper, C. S., & Woods, D. J. (2011). A randomized controlled trial of different policing strategies at hot spots of violent crime. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7(2), 149 181.

Telep, C. W., Mitchell, R. J., & Weisburd, D. (2014). How much time should the police spend at crime hot spots? Answers from a police agency directed randomized field trial in Sacramento, California. Justice Quarterly, 31(5), 905–933.

Weisburd, D., & Green, L. (1995). Policing drug hot spots: The Jersey City drug market analysis experiment. Justice Quarterly, 12(4), 711–735.

Renée J. Mitchell is a sergeant at the Sacramento Police Department, a visiting scholar at the University of Cambridge and a post-doctoral researcher at Hebrew University of Jerusalem. She was a 2009/2010 Fulbright Police Research Fellow.

