Lewis et al. Crime Science           (2024) 13:18 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s40163-024-00216-8

Crime Science

SHORT CONTRIBUTION Open Access

The risk of negative feedback loops in some  weighted measures of crime harm

Sam Lewis1* , Jose Pina-Sánchez1 and Daniel Birks1

Abstract

Analyses of crime based upon aggregate counts of different crime types have restricted value, because they  count all crime types equally irrespective of the harm caused. In response to this problem, a series of weighted  measures of crime harm have been proposed. In this short contribution, we contend that the use of some  crime harm metrics to inform police deployment practices has the potential to reinforce ethnic disparities in the  criminal justice system through the creation of unintended negative feedback loops. We focus our analysis on the  Cambridge Crime Harm Index and the Office for National Statistics (ONS) Crime Severity Score, the preeminent  crime harm indexes in England and Wales. We conclude that the ONS Crime Severity Score, which is based on  mean sentencing outcomes, does give cause for concern in some contexts. There is currently no evidence that the  Cambridge Crime Harm Index, based on sentencing guidelines, presents the same problems.

Keywords Crime, Harm, Ethnicity, Disproportionality, Crime harm index, Crime severity score

In this paper, however, we highlight a potential problem  that  could  arise  from  the  uncritical  application  of  some weighted crime metrics, namely, the risk of exacerbating the ethnic inequalities detected in the criminal  justice system. To our knowledge, this issue has thus far  gone unnoticed in the growing literature on this topic.  After defining key terms, we begin by noting the global  development  of  these  tools  and  discussing  two  principal methods of calculating crime weights. We then turn  our attention to England and Wales, and the Cambridge  Crime  Harm  Index  (CHI)  and  the  Office  for  National  Statistics (ONS) Crime Severity Score (CSS), noting key  similarities  and  differences  between  these  tools.  In  the  main  body  of  this  short  article,  we  outline  the  process  whereby some metrics could exacerbate existing ethnic  disparities in the criminal justice system. We conclude by  encouraging critical reflection upon the construction and  use of weighted measures of crime harm.

Introduction

The  last  two  decades  have  seen  the  development  of  weighted  crime  harm  indexes  in  jurisdictions  around  the  world  (Curtis-Ham,  2022:  180–182).  These  are  intended  to  provide  a  more  meaningful  measure  of  police-recorded crime than typical crime counts, which  count all crimes equally regardless of impact (Sherman  et al., 2016). The case of England and Wales illustrates  the relevance of considering crime harm. This jurisdiction has seen an overall decline in crime since the early  1990s (Farrell et al., 2014). Despite this, the emergence  of  complex  problems  (e.g.  online  child  sexual  exploitation,  human  trafficking,  modern  slavery),  increased  demand around longstanding issues (e.g. domestic abuse,  homelessness, mental health problems), and reductions  in police funding and staff (Home Office, 2022: 9), have  placed significant pressure on the police. Weighted crime  metrics  can  therefore  assist  by  targeting  scarce  police  resources on the people causing, and the places experiencing, the greatest harm.

*Correspondence:

Sam Lewis

lawsjl@leeds.ac.uk

1School of Law, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK

© The Author(s) 2024. Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use,  sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and  the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this  article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included  in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will  need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The  Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available  in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

The UK’s ONS advanced an alternative weighted measure of police-recorded crime to supplement traditional  crime  counts  (ONS,  2016).  The  ONS  CSS  is  intended  ‘to reflect the relative harm of an offence to society and  the  likely  demands  on  the  police’  (p.  2).  In  contrast  to  the  Cambridge  CHI,  the  ONS  CSS  takes  the  second  approach,  originally  weighting  offences  based  on  mean  sentencing  outcomes  over  five  years  ending  December  2015  (p.  4).  This  was  chosen  as  an  ‘objective  measure,  reflecting how society views crimes differently … based  on legislation set by Parliament on behalf of the public’  (p. 4).

A note on terminology

In  England  and  Wales,  court  sentences  are  required  to  reflect  the  ‘seriousness’  (or  severity)  of  the  offence.  Assessments  of  seriousness  encompass  both  the  culpability  of  the  offender  and  the  ‘harm’  caused  (or  at  risk  of being caused) by the offence (Sentencing Guidelines  Council,  2004).  In  other  words,  measures  of  seriousness (or severity) include but are not limited to the harm  caused  to  victims  and  communities.  To  be  clear,  then,  seriousness (or severity) on the one hand, and harm on  the other, are not synonymous.

The same but different

Both  the  Cambridge  CHI  and  the  ONS  CSS  offer  weighted  measures  of  police-recorded  crime.  However,  Ashby (2017) found that they produced markedly different estimates of harm for similar crimes, leading to different crime harm totals for areas, and cautioned against  using them interchangeably. He concluded that both are  imperfect but preferable to aggregate crime counts, and  ‘there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  reason  to  prefer  one  measure over the other’ (p. 449).

Background

Others  take  a  different  view.  Bland  and  Ariel  (2020)  questioned whether the ONS CSS weightings, which are  based  on  sentencing  decisions  that  reflect  myriad  considerations beyond the harm caused by the offence (e.g.  criminal history, personal mitigating factors, guilty plea  discounts, etc.), provide a reliable measure of harm (p.  76–77). Similarly, Sherman et al. (2020) contended that  the inclusion of offender-related factors makes the ONS  CSS an unreliable measure of crime harm (Sherman et al.  2020).

Recent  years  have  seen  the  emergence  of  methods  for  weighting  different  offence  types  to  reflect  the  harm  caused  by  different  offences  and  shape  the  police  response. Most weighted measures of crime operate in  one  of  two  ways.  The  first  approach,  utilised  in  countries  including  Canada,  Denmark,  Hungary,  Japan  and  various  American  states,  uses  sentencing  guidelines  to  calculate  the  weights  attached  to  different  crimes:  the  greater the (minimum, maximum or median) sentence,  the  greater  the  weight.  The  second  approach,  used  in  Australia, Ireland, Italy, New Zealand, and Sweden, often  in the absence of official sentencing guidelines, bases the  weights  on  actual  sentences  (see  Bland  &  Ariel,  2020:  63–82; Curtis-Ham, 2022; Ruitenberg & Ruiter, 2022).1

Racial disparities and weighted crime metrics

The Statistics on Ethnicity and the Criminal Justice System 2022 (Ministry of Justice, 2024) show the over-representation of minority ethnic groups at many stages of the  criminal justice system compared to their representation  within the general population. The over-representation of  minority ethnic groups in the raw (or ‘unadjusted’) data is  not, however, evidence of differential and discriminatory  treatment,  but  could  have  legitimate  explanations  (e.g.  variations in offence type or criminal history by ethnicity) (p. 8).

Key developments in England and Wales

Taking the first approach, Sherman et al. (2016) advanced  the  Cambridge  CHI,  which  uses  the  custodial  ‘starting  point’  in  the  Sentencing  Council’s  Sentencing  Guidelines  to  weight  different  crimes.  More  harmful  crimes  are  expected  to  have  higher  ‘starting  points’  producing  greater weights. Bland and Ariel (2020: 70 − 1) describe  the Cambridge CHI as the ‘catalyst for a relative explosion’ in similar tools in jurisdictions including Denmark,  Sweden, Australia and New Zealand.

A growing body of research from England and Wales  has gone beyond the raw data, however, and after controlling  for  factors  that  could  legitimately  affect  outcomes, found evidence of ethnic disparities at key stages  of the criminal justice system. For example, Uhrig (2016)  found that despite self-reports showing that members of  minority  ethnic  groups  are  less  likely  to  commit  crime  than white people, arrest rates were markedly higher for  Black  and  Mixed  Heritage  males  and  females,  and  for  young Black males (p. 12). A recent study of demographic  disparities  in  charging  decisions  in  England  and  Wales  found that after controlling for sex, age and offence type,  minority  ethnic  suspects  were  significantly  more  likely  to  be  charged  with  an  offence  than  white  British  suspects (CPS 2023). When being tried at the Crown Court,  minority ethnic defendants were more likely than white  defendants to plead ‘not guilty’ (Uhrig, 2016: 28), which  (for those ultimately found guilty) limits the prospect of  receiving a sentence reduction because of a guilty plea.

1   For completeness, we note that other  methods  of  weighting  have  been  proposed, such as: (i) public perception-based tools, which have been criticised for lack of consistency; and (ii) economic harm-based measures, which  garnered interest in England and Wales at the start of this century that has  since waned (Bland & Ariel, 2020: 65–69).

Thus,  there  is  growing  evidence  of  unjustified  racial  disparities at different stages of the criminal justice system in England and Wales. Further, theories of cumulative disadvantage suggest that rather than being episodic,  disadvantage may build as people progress through the  criminal  justice  system  (Kurlycheck  &  Johnson  2019).  Figure 1 illustrates how ethnicity (Eth) might affect the  ONS CSS (top) and the Cambridge CHI (bottom).

Additionally,  several  studies  have  found  evidence  of  unjustified  ethnic  disparities  at  the  sentencing  stage.  Isaac (2020) examined the impact of an offender’s sex and  ethnicity on sentences imposed by the Crown Court for  drug  offences.  Black,  Asian  and  ‘other’  offenders  were  more likely to receive an immediate custodial sentence  for  drug  supply  offences  than  white  offenders,  whilst  Asian offenders received longer custodial sentences than  white offenders (p. 4). Hopkins et al. (2016) explored the  relationship  between  ethnicity  and  custodial  sentences  in the Crown Court, and found that the odds of imprisonment  for  indictable  offences  were  higher  for  Black,  Asian and Chinese offenders than white offenders (p. 1).  This finding varied by offence type, and was particularly  marked in relation to drugs offences, where the odds of a  custodial sentence for Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic  offenders was more than twice the odds for white defendants (p. 9).

The top diagram illustrates how the main causal mechanisms linked to ethnic disparities in criminal justice outcomes (i.e. arrest [Arr], charge [Chr], conviction [Con],  guilty  plea  [GP],  and  sentencing  [Stc])  feed  into  one  another, and ultimately into the ONS CSS. The bottom  diagram concerns the relationship between ethnicity, the  sentencing guidelines [SG] and the Cambridge CHI.

Ethnicity and the use of weighted metrics to target people  and places

The consequences of our observations are significant for  crime harm indexes like the ONS CSS that utilise mean  sentencing outcomes to derive offence weights. The ranking of crimes by harm caused may be distorted as a result  of unwarranted disparities in the criminal justice system,  with crime types where ethnic minorities are heavily represented appearing more severe than where they are not.  Drug offences provide an example. In 2022, 33% of adult  males convicted of drug offences in England and Wales  were from Black, Asian, Mixed Heritage or ‘other’ ethnic  groups and 67% were white (Ministry of Justice, 2023).  Hopkins et al. (2016) found that ethnicity had a ‘strong  effect’ on the odds of imprisonment for minority ethnic  offenders for drug crime (see also Isaac, 2020). Our contention, then, is that the large proportion of minority ethnic offenders within this crime type may have inflated the  ONS crime severity weighting for drug crimes.2

Criminal  justice  outcomes  are  shaped  by  myriad  factors that are not all recorded in administrative datasets  (e.g. offenders’ culpability, or genuine remorse). Thus, it  is impossible to control for all factors that could legitimately affect outcomes. Although these studies failed to  control for all relevant case characteristics, Pina-Sánchez  et al. (2022) used sensitivity analysis to demonstrate that  the  ethnic  disparities  were  too  strong  to  be  explained  away by unmeasured confounders.

As  noted  above,  the  original  ONS  CSS  weights  were  based on mean sentences from a five-year period ending  in December 2015. Since then the proportion of offenders convicted of drug offences who were white has fallen  year-on-year, from 72% in 2015 to 67% in 2022 (Ministry  of Justice, 2023). Further, research by Pina-Sánchez et al.  (2019) found an overall 39% increase in sentence severity between 1999 and 2018 for ‘indictable only’ offences  including drug offences. Calver (2024) has documented  this process of sentence inflation with more recent data.  If  the  severity  metric  for  drug  crime  was  recalculated  using more recent sentencing data, it would be further  inflated by these trends.3

2  Alternatively, it could be that majority ethnic offenders are treated more  leniently than their minority ethnic counterparts. The way to determine the  dominant mechanism at play would be to compare the average disparity for  each ethnic group against a given benchmark, e.g. the sentencing starting  point stipulated in the guidelines.

Discussion and conclusion

Weighted measures are an alternative to aggregate crime  counts. They have the potential to assist police to target  scarce resources on high-harm offenders, and the areas  most  affected  by  crime  harm,  and  afford  a  picture  of  local and national trends in crime harm over time. The  Crime Survey for England and Wales estimated that levels  of  victimisation  are  highest  amongst  Black,  Asian,  Mixed Heritage, and other minority ethnic groups compared  to  the  white  group  (ONS,  2021),  which  suggests  that targeted crime prevention strategies could be of particular benefit to these communities. At the same time,  this  article  suggests  that  the  use  of  metrics  based  on  mean sentences could have unintended and undesirable  consequences.

Our concern, then, is that the use of mean-sentencebased  metrics  to  inform  police  deployment  practices  risks further exacerbating ethnic disparities. In the worstcase scenario, there is the potential to create a harmful  feedback loop, whereby minority ethnic individuals and  places  with  large  minority  ethnic  populations  receive  increased  police  attention  on  account  of  (high)  harm  scores fuelled by racial bias, generating more offences to  feed into future weighting exercises, and potentially reinforcing the existing distortions that contributed to sentencing disparities.4

In some jurisdictions, sentence-based CHIs have been  constructed to minimise the impact of offender culpability. For example, first-time offenders’ median sentences  were  used  in  Australia  (House  &  Neyroud,  2018)  and  estimated  starting  point  sentences  (based  on  the  15th  percentile  of  actual  sentences)  were  deployed  in  New  Zealand  (Curtis-Ham  &  Walton,  2017)  to  mitigate  the  effect of criminal history on CHI calculations. As Fig. 1 shows,  however,  criminal  antecedents  are  not  the  only  offender-related  determinant  of  sentencing  outcomes,  nor  the  only  one  influenced  by  ‘race  effects’.  Whether  racial bias fuels the marked over-representation of Indigenous people in Australasian criminal justice systems is  a longstanding concern (O’Brien, 2021), and Australian  research  found  that  even  responses  to  first-time  juvenile offenders varied by Indigenous status (Papalia et al.,  2019). Thus, even indexes that use actual or proxy starting  point  sentences  for  first  time  offenders  to  estimate  harm,  when  used  to  target  people  and  places,  could  amplify ethnic disparities.

In contrast, the Cambridge CHI weightings are based  on the custodial ‘starting points’ for offences as stated in  the Sentencing Guidelines (SG). If the ‘starting points’ for  offence types disproportionately linked to ethnic minorities  were  longer  than  those  for  comparable  offences  disproportionately  linked  to  white  British  offenders,  unwarranted  ethnic  disparities  might  also  affect  the  Cambridge CHI, as illustrated in the bottom diagram in  Fig. 1. There is no evidence to suggest this is the case,  however. A report entitled Equality and Diversity in the  Work of the Sentencing Council, which presents the findings of research to examine whether the Council’s work  might cause variations in outcomes for different groups,  found nothing that supports this hypothesis (Chen et al.,  2023).5

Since  its  original  release,  the  ONS  CSS  has  been  updated.  The  current  tool  uses  sentencing  data  from  a  five-year  period  ending  December  2019  to  calculate  offence weights (ONS, 2023). Whilst the derivation of the  tool remains the same, this will not resolve the problems  raised in this article. As noted above, for offences where  increases in ethnic disproportionality have been accompanied  by  increases  in  sentence  severity,  the  problem  may even be exacerbated. That the ONS CSS weight for  trafficking in controlled drugs has increased from 513 in  the original index to 667 in the latest version supports  our argument.

3   Specifically,  in  a  more  up  to  date  analysis  of  the  problem  of  sentence  inflation  (available  here:  https://josepinasanchez.uk/wp-content/ uploads/2023/09/esels2023_sentence-inflation.pdf)  Pina-Sánchez  documents an increase in sentence severity of drug offences from 2015 to 2023  of roughly 50%, whereas the average sentence severity for all offences in that  same period only increased in about 5%. Hence, if the ONS CSS was to be  updated with the latest data drug offences would be weighted as 45% more  severe relative to other offence types.

The solution is not to abandon weighted measures, but  to tackle upstream ethnic disparities. While they persist,  we would encourage policy makers and practitioners in  England and Wales (and beyond) to think carefully about  the  construction  of  weighted  measures  of  crime  harm  and the contexts in which they are deployed. Whilst sentence-based indexes could be used to counter racial-bias,  e.g.  by  using  them  to  identify  individuals  and  communities  for  preventative  or  therapeutic  interventions,  we  contend  that  their  use  to  target  police  resources  risks  exacerbating ethnic disparities.

4   Excluding  crime  discovered  through  proactive  policing  from  any  CHI  might alleviate this (see Sherman et al. 2020). As Fig. 1 shows, however, bias  occurs at various stages of the criminal justice system that impact upon sentencing. Thus, excluding crimes discovered through proactive policing does  not remove all possible sites of bias.

5  The Cambridge CHI is not without problems, however. In particular, it  does not capture the cumulative effect of repeat victimisation, a common  feature of intimate partner abuse, where the whole (harm) may be greater  than the sum of the (individual-offence-related) parts.

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Detective Superintendent Dan St Quintin of  Cumbria Constabulary for his helpful feedback on an earlier draft. We are also  indebted to three anonymous reviewers whose considered and insightful  feedback strengthened the article.

Author contributions

All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding

This short contribution was inspired by work by Sam Lewis and Daniel Birks  (with Sat Kartar Chandan and Natacha Chenevoy) to examine the geospatial  and contextual patterns on rural domestic abuse, which deployed the ONS  CSS. The research was conducted in collaboration with Cumbria Constabulary  and funded by the Home Office police Science, Technology and Research  (STAR) fund. Daniel Birks is partly supported through the Economic and Social  Research Council (Grant number: ES/W002248/1).

Data availability

Not applicable.

Declarations

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Received: 12 July 2023 / Accepted: 5 June 2024

References

Ashby, M. P. J. (2017). Comparing Methods for Measuring Crime Harm / Severity.  Policing, 12(4), 439–454.

Bland, M. P., & Ariel, B. (2020). Targeting domestic abuse with Police Data. Springer.

Calver, T. (2024, April 23). Why are there so many prisoners in England and Wales? The  crisis explained. The Times.

Chen, Q., Vuk, M., Kuppuswamy, C., & Kirsch, D. (2023). Equality and diversity in the  work of the sentencing Council. Sentencing Council.

Crown Prosecution Service. (2023). CPS charging decisions – examining demographic disparities in the outcomes of our decision making. CPS.

Curtis-Ham, S. (2022). Measuring crime with crime harm indices. In M. Bland, & B.  Ariel (Eds.), The Crime Analyst’s companion (pp. 177–192). Springer.

Curtis-Ham, S., & Walton, D. (2017). The New Zealand Crime Harm Index: Quantifying harm using sentencing data. Policing, 12(4), 455–467.

Farrell, G., Tilley, N., & Tseloni, A. (2014). Why the crime drop? Crime and Justice, 43,  421–490.

Home Office. (2022). Police workforce, England and Wales: 31 March 2022. Home  Office.

Hopkins, K., Uhrig, N., & Colahan, M. (2016). Associations between ethnic background  and being sentenced to prison in the Crown Court in England and Wales in 2015.  Ministry of Justice.

HouseP.D., & NeyroudP.W. (2018). Developing a crime harm index for western Australia: The WACHI. Cambridge Journal of Evidence-Based Policing, 2, 70–94.

Isaac, A. (2020). Investigating the association between an offender’s sex and ethnicity  and the sentence imposed at the Crown Court for drug offences. Sentencing  Council for England and Wales.

Kurlycheck, M. C., & Johnson, B. D. (2019). Cumulative disadvantage in the American criminal justice system. Annual Review of Criminology, 2, 291–319.

Ministry of Justice. (2023). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2022.  Ministry of Justice. (Outcomes by Offence Data Tool).

Ministry of Justice. (2024). Statistics on ethnicity and the Criminal Justice System 2022.  MoJ.

O’Brien, G. (2021). Racial profiling, Surveillance and Over-policing: The over-incarceration of Young First Nations males in Australia. Social Sciences, 10(2), 68.  https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci10020068.

ONS. (2016). Research outputs: Developing a crime severity score for England and  Wales using data on crimes recorded by the police. ONS.

ONS. (2021). Victims of crime: Ethnicity facts and figures. ONS.

ONS. (2023). Crime severity score (experimental statistics). ONS.

Papalia, N., Shepherd, S. M., Spivak, B., Luebbers, S., Shea, D. E., & Fullam, R. (2019).  Disparities in criminal justice system responses to first-time juvenile offenders according to indigenous status. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 46(8),  1067–1087.

Pina-Sánchez, J., Gosling, J. P., Chung, H. I., Geneletti, S., Bourgeois, E., & Marder, I.  (2019). Have the England and Wales guidelines affected sentencing severity?  An empirical analysis using a scale of severity and time-series analyses. The  British Journal of Criminology, 59(4), 979–1001.

Pina-Sánchez, J., Geneletti, S., Veiga, A., Morales, A., & Guilfoyle, E. (2022). Can ethnic  disparities in sentencing be taken as evidence of judicial discrimination?  Journal of Legal Research Methodology, 3(1), 54–82.

Ruitenberg, T. V., & Ruiter, S. (2022). The adoption of a crime harm index: A scoping  literature review. Police Practice and Research: An International Journal, 1–23.

Sentencing Guidelines Council. (2004). Overarching principles: Seriousness. SGC.

Sherman, L., & Cambridge University Associates. (2020). How to count crime: The  Cambridge Harm Index Consensus. Cambridge Journal of Evidence-Based  Policing, 4, 1–14.

Sherman, L., Neyroud, P. W., & Neyroud, E. (2016). The Cambridge crime harm index:  Measuring total harm from crime based on sentencing guidelines. Policing,  10(3), 171–183.

Uhrig, N. (2016). Black, Asian and minority ethnic disproportionality in the criminal  justice system in England and Wales. Ministry of Justice.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in  published maps and institutional affiliations.

Sam Lewis is Associate Professor of Criminal Justice and Criminology whose  research focuses on domestic abuse, and on minority ethnic experiences of  criminal justice. Jose Pina-Sánchez is Professor in Quantitative Criminology,  whose research addresses ethnic disparities in the criminal justice system.  Daniel Birks is Professor of Quantitative Policing and Crime Data Analytics,  whose research explores how public service administrative data can support  understanding and disruption of crime and related problems.

