Camb J Evid Based Polic (2017) 1:38–58 DOI 10.1007/s41887-017-0001-3

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

The BPower Curve^ of Victim Harm: Targeting the Distribution of Crime Harm Index Values Across All Victims and Repeat Victims over 1 Year

Gavin Dudfield1 & Caroline Angel2 & Lawrence W. Sherman2,3 & Sarah Torrence4

Published online: 26 May 2017 # Springer International Publishing AG 2017

Abstract

Research Question Is the vast majority of crime harm in one police force area over 1 year suffered by a small percent of all known victims, with many of those mostharmed victims suffering repeated and perhaps preventable crimes if more police resources were to be invested in them?

Data All 30,244 crimes recorded as committed against all 25,831 persons with one or more known victimization reported between 1 June 2015 and 31 May 2016 in Dorset, UK.

Methods Each criminal event was weighted by the Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI) method, using the number of days of imprisonment recommended by the Sentencing Council for England and Wales as the Bstarting point^ for sentencing offenders convicted in each crime category. Regardless of whether an offender was detected or convicted, each crime was coded with the starting point penalty. The total number of days assigned was then summed across all crimes in Dorset and individually for each victim, with the victims rank-ordered from highest to lowest number of total days of recommended imprisonment assigned to each (the Cambridge CHI value).

Findings Under 4% of victims (968) suffered 85% of the CHI value of total days of recommended punishment for the crimes against all victims, with sex offences and robbery contributing almost two thirds of total CHI harm (63%).Almost one third (29%) of the harm were committed against repeat victims, including their first

* Gavin Dudfield gavin.dudfield@dorset.pnn.police.uk

- 1 Dorset Police, UK
- 2 Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge, Sidgwick Ave, Cambridge CB3 9DA, UK
- 3 Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, 2220 Lefrak Hall, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
- 4 Department of Mathematics, Denison University, P.O. Box 810, Granville, OH 43023-0810, USA


victimization within the 1-year period. Slightly over half of the harm against those repeat victims (57% of the harm across 4211 victimizations against repeat victims) occurred after their first victimization, equal to 15% of total harm to all victims that year. Just 256 repeat victims, comprising 1% of all victims, suffered 26% of total victim harm, ranging from 2 to 14 victimizations per person. The mean CHI value for each of these repeat victims was 1396 days (∼4 years) of recommended imprisonment for the totals of anywhere from 2 to 14 crimes against each member of this beleaguered 1%. The overall concentration of harm in a tiny fraction of all victims forms a Bdisproportionality ratio^ of 15:1, with the Bpower few^ most-harmed 4% of victims suffering 15 times more harm than expected if all victims suffered equal harm, with the highest disproportionality ratios of any offence types, 19 to 1 for sex offences and 5 to 1 for robbery. Conversely, the total CHI value of thefts was 0.143:1 or only one seventh of what it would have been with an equal distribution of harm across all criminal events. The ratio for burglary was 0.25:1, and even for violence (0.67:1), there was 33% less harm than expected for equal harm by crime type.

Conclusion The vast majority of crime harm in one UK police force area over 1 year was suffered by a small percent of all known victims, with 15% of total harm occurring as repeat victimizations. This finding demonstrates the value of better algorithms for predicting repeat victimizations to allocate prevention resources, starting with the Cambridge CHI value of each first offence against each victim.

Keywords Targeting . Cambridge Crime Harm Index . CHI . Victims . Repeat victimization . Power curve . Sex offences. Policing

Introduction

Police agencies around the world are under pressure to Breduce crime.^ Yet, that demand can be defined in many different ways. If Breduction^ simply means fewer crimes, then that demand can be met by reducing burglaries, even if murders and serious sex crimes increased substantially? Few people would consider that scenario to be Breducing^ crime, yet technically, it would fit the definition of fewer crime events. What democracies may be seeking by a demand to reduce crime is to have less harm caused by crime. On that premise, Sherman (2007, 2011, 2013), Statistics Canada (Wallace 2009), Ratcliffe (2014), Sherman et al. (2016a), and the UK’s Office for National Statistics (2016) have all suggested various ways of measuring the total severity of crime harm as an alternative to relying on sheer crime volume. Using a harm-weighted system, as well as volume, for setting police priorities could lead to greater reductions in total crime harm and better serve the public interest.

The premise of that proposal is that harm-based crime analysis would lead to a substantially different list of high-priority targets for police resources (Sherman 2013). The evidence for that premise has been growing with respect to both locations and offenders, analyzed across all crimes reported to police. Yet, it is the individual victims of crime, rather than where or by whom they are victimized, that are the highest priority for any police agency. And for those victims, the theory that harm analysis would change the targeting strategy remains largely untested. This article provides what

appears to be the first such test across all crimes and all victims in one police agency over 1 year.

The core idea of evidence-based targeting has two elements. The first is that the return on investment of police resources varies widely across targets. The second is that only a systematic analysis of all crimes, using an objective criterion for comparison and rank ordering, can precisely identify the greatest to lowest potential improvements in public safety. Because police cannot give equal attention to all crime reports, the key question becomes the fairest and best way to allocate unequal investment of taxpayer’s money in preventing and detecting crimes. The advance of crime count analysis in recent years has made substantial progress towards producing objective evidence about different volumes of crime associated with different targets, especially the most predictable and preventable, such as repeat offenders, repeat victims, and crime hot spots. Yet, these methods all have the great limitation of treating all crimes as if they are equal in the harm they cause to the community (Sherman 2007), a premise that is rejected by virtually every known system of criminal sentencing. By broad consensus, crime types differ widely in the Bharm^ they cause, broadly conceived, to crime victims, their families, and communities.

The idea of measuring crime harm severity to setting police priorities has recently been applied to many operational questions in policing, especially to the three primary targets for police resource allocation, which are locations, offenders, and victims (Sherman 2013). Crime harm has been plotted by specific street addresses (Weinborn 2017) as an alternative to plotting Bhot spots^ of counts of criminal events (Sherman et al. 1989). Crime harm has also been used to set priorities across offenders, either of all crime types or within specific categories, such as sex offenders (Jackman 2015; this volume). These applications have already led some police agencies to make substantial changes in their targeting analyses for police operations (Economist 2016), with maps showing the contrast between locations prioritized on volume of crime vs. its aggregate harm. Similarly, domestic violence offenders have often been assigned priorities defined by the volume of each offender’s crimes, yet many prolific offenders cause only low levels of harm in each offence. Because many high-harm offenders, in contrast, may have committed only one or two crimes in their entire lives, at least one large police agency is now targeting domestic abuse based on offender harm (Knowles 2016; Sherman et al. 2016b).

These changes are based on a consistent finding of the concentration of crime harm in an extremely skewed distribution that statisticians call a Bpower curve.^ Unlike the Bbell curve^ of a Bnormal^ distribution, the power curve creates massive differences in the quantity of concern between those with the most and those with the least—from money to illness to crime harm. This pattern has clearly been demonstrated for couples (or victim-offender dyads) known to police for domestic abuse, when they have been rank-ordered in terms of the total severity of crime harm over an extended period (Bland and Ariel 2015; Kerr 2016). In Suffolk, UK, for example, under 2% of all couples known to suffer domestic abuse accounted for some 80% of the total crime harm (Bland and Ariel 2015). For both offenders and victims, such offence-specific rankings help to clarify policy around a particular crime problem, which may have a different set of external partnerships and advocacy groups from other crime types.

Yet, isolation of victim harm analysis by crime type may risk the unintended creation of neglect of those victims who may not have advocacy groups to support them. The

only way to avoid that neglect is to conduct an all-victim, all-crime ranking of harm for the evidence-based targeting of police resources. Whether this method would change targeting practices depends entirely on the evidence about it. If there is little or no concentration of harm in a small percentage of victims, there would be little reason for police to revise their targeting strategies. If there is a power curve of all-victim harm, however, the case for revising police strategies to at least consider harm concentrations would be compelling.

The potential value of ranking all victims across all crime types in this way has not previously been highly recommended. Sherman (1992, pp. 180–181), for example, found relatively little efficiency in targeting repeat victims across all crime types. His team’s analysis of all repeat crime victims in Kansas City (MO) reported that BCompared to places and offenders, the individual victims of crime are substantially less predictable.^ In the 5 years of 1985–1989, 3% of the city Buser^ population produced only 20% of all 231,714 victimizations of persons. Victims with two or more victimizations in that 5-year period contributed only 38% of the total, in contrast to suspects with two or more arrests producing 62% of total arrests. Based on the relatively lower concentrations of events among victims, Sherman did not recommend that police operations be guided by victim crime count rankings.

What Sherman failed to address was his finding that in Kansas City, the 269 victims with 10 or more victimizations suffered a 5-year total of 3372 crimes. This group, in retrospect, seemed highly likely to suffer far more harm than most other victims, even than most repeat victims. Sherman (1992) also failed at that time to address the more recently developed recognition that not all crimes are created equal. His focus on the modest concentrations of crime counts by victims obscured the question of whether the same distribution actually had substantial concentration of crime harm in a small number of victims.

The present study offers a clarification of the difference between repeat victimization and high crime harm, with or without repeat victimization. It applies the Cambridge Crime Harm Index (Sherman et al. 2016a) to 1 year’s worth of Dorset Police crime data to understand if harm is concentrated to a Bpower few^ (Sherman 2007) number of victims. The results provide police forces with the framework to advance and complement established crime data analysis that solely report on crime counts, especially against individual victims. By embedding evidence-based methods which focus on the harm suffered by victims, police forces may be able to consider organizational restructuring of their investigative and prevention operations, together with the development of operational and strategic practices to better target the reduction of crime as defined by total harm against crime victims.

Research Question: Measuring and Targeting Victim Harm

The research question for this study is whether the majority of total victim harm across all crimes in 1 year in Dorset is highly concentrated in a small fraction of victims, with a substantial portion of harm from repeat victimizations. That research question is based on two methodological traditions. One tradition is the statistical distribution of phenomena across all possible units in which those phenomena can occur. The other tradition is the long-standing effort to differentiate the amount of

harm across different types of crime into the full range of analyses in criminology and criminal justice.

The first methodological tradition began with the statistical distribution most famously represented by the normal bell curve, with the greatest frequency of cases in the middle of any distribution across all cases. Yet in recent years, there is growing evidence that the bell curve is less often found than a power curve pattern, in which most cases are at the far end of a distribution (Taleb 2007). The Bpower^ of a small fraction of all cases was discovered by Pareto’s (1896) studies of the concentration of wealth in land ownership and incomes in Italy—often described (crudely) as the B80– 20 rule,^ in which 20% of the units have 80% of the phenomenon distributed (such as wealth). Since then, such Bpower laws^ have been found in phenomena as diverse as historical patterns of increase in the number of biological species (Yule 1925) and the frequency with which the 60,000 words in the English language are used in ordinary speech (Zipf 1932). In criminology, as noted above, power curves of crime counts have been found in many studies of offenders and places (Sherman et al. 1989, 2007). Across all known offenders in any community, as well as all known locations, the concentration of crimes has repeatedly been shown to lie within a small percentage of the units which contribute a very large majority of the total crime events (Weisburd

- 2015). The second methodological tradition contributing to our research question is the


study of harm levels across crimes. Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) were at the forefront of trying to create a harm-based scale of the seriousness, or relative severity, of different kinds of crimes. Their initial objective was to create an index by which they could measure the effectiveness of programs that were designed to reduce adolescent delinquency. Yet, their project had much broader applicability, as it prompted a series of objective and replicable methods for rating the quantity of harm or severity for each crime type. Their original index was based upon the objective averages of the subjective views of 38 juvenile court judges, 286 police officers, and 251 students who rank ordered 141 offences using a scale from 1 to 11. Rossi et al. (1974) built upon the innovative work of Sellin and Wolfgang (1964) by conducting a sample survey of 400 people, with the aim of securing a better representation of the population, in Baltimore, USA, in 1972. Wolfgang et al. (1985) then surveyed 60,000 people aged 18 and over in 1977. What none of these methods could do, however, is to provide a way to cut across the competing views of different people in a way that overcame inherent biases in the survey samples.

By the twenty-first century, the spread of sentencing guidelines had provided a way to overcome such biases (Sherman 2013; Ratcliffe 2014). Because democratically elected legislatures delegated sentencing recommendations to expert councils of judges and academics, the legitimacy of the subjective judgments of harm in all its meanings was established in the voting booth. Just as democracies rarely have unanimity, guidelines do not necessarily represent the consensus of the population. They do, at least, represent a process in which all voices are heard but one view wins, crime by crime, with relatively little change over time.

Sherman (2013) and Sherman et al. (2016a, b) used sentencing guidelines to create the Cambridge Crime Harm Index (CHI) as an indicator that is Bdemocratic, reliable, and cost-effective^. The CHI relies on judicial guidance to apply a hierarchy of harm scores across all crime types, derived from the sentencing guidelines used by

magistrates and judges in England and Wales when considering the punishment to be handed down to an offender of a crime. The CHI converts the number of days in prison recommended as the penalty for committing an offence, without any aggravating or mitigating offender or offence factors, to create a harm score for each offence, which sentencing guidelines call the Bstarting point.^ For example, the offence of rape has a harm score of 1825, because the starting point on the sentencing guidelines is 5 years, which equates to 1825 days.

Where the starting point sentence recommends not imprisonment but a community order, or fine, the CHI creates the harm score by applying the number of days it would take, earning the minimum wage, to pay the fine or complete the community order. For example, the starting point for the possession of a class C drug is a low-level fine. The harm score for this offence is 1, as it would take 1 day to earn the money, at the minimum wage to pay the fine. Over 600 offences have now been coded for use by researchers.

The value of combining these methodological traditions for evidence-based policing is not limited to the study of victims. The CHI broadly helps to address the more general issue that arises in any evidence-based targeting analysis, whether a comprehensive, quantitative analysis is superior to the intuitive experience of police officers. The statistical concentration analysis tradition is adding substantial evidence to conclude that evidence beats experience. Macbeth (2015), for example, analyzed 4070 hot spots (called Bwaymarkers^) within northern Ireland that had been targeted on the basis of subjective officer experience in 2013 and 2014. Her research found that 97% of street segments which were included in the list of waymarkers were not identified as either crime count hot spots or CHI-based Bharmspots.^ In addition, she found that only

- 1.8% of street segments were identified as CHI harmspots, accounting for 54.3% of total CHI harm in the area. At the same time, over 60% of street segments which were identified using data analysis had been excluded from the list of waymarkers. Her comprehensive analysis of all places and crimes showed far greater concentration in a much smaller geographical area than traditional methods not based on systematic analysis of the statistical evidence. There is at least some evidence, then, to conclude that concentration analysis cannot be done as well without CHI data as it can be by using the classic statistical techniques for analyzing distributions across entire populations of units at risk, such as places or victims.


Data

Dorset is a county and police area situated on the south coast of England, with a population of 760,000 people (HMIC 2016). The county also enjoys a reported 30 million tourists every year (Tourist Academy 2016). Dorset is mainly a rural county with three conurbation areas, each with its own Local Authority Council. The county is well known to attract retired individuals, and therefore, a considerable percentage of the population are over the age of 65 years (Dorset County Council 2016).

The data for our research comes entirely from Dorset Police records. Dorset Police complies with the UK Home Office National Crime Recording Standards, whereby each criminal act is recorded using an approved Home Office Code (see HMIC 2014). A year’s worth of Dorset Police crime data from 1 June 2015 to 31 May 2016 was

downloaded directly from the Dorset Police computer system called Niche-RMS (Records Management System). The data was downloaded into a Microsoft Excel file, by a senior performance analyst, using a computer system called BBusiness Objects.^

Niche-RMS is a single database that records crime-related occurrences (hereafter called Bcrime reports^), as well as intelligence reports and person-based records within one database. Niche-RMS also records the individual offence type name (such as Bmanslaughter^), together with the Home Office Code. The Niche-RMS system was implemented in May 2015 and was selected for analysis because of the ability that the system had to provide information on a number of variables to answer the research questions.

Niche-RMS was also chosen because the previous system was incompatible with the CHI. The following is important to understand should any police force wish to undertake future analysis using the CHI. The previous Dorset Police system did not provide specific crime descriptions; it only provided broad Home Office Codes that could cover a number of specific offences, each with different harm scores. In order to reliably apply the CHI to victim data, it is essential to assign a harm score to the specific offence suffered and not simply the broad Home Office Code.

For example, the old system would only provide data in a way that grouped offences together. All offences that related to offences of sexual activity with a female aged below 13 years were recorded as Home Office Code of 21:0A. However, the code 21:0A accounted for a number of different offence types, which had very different harm scores, ranging from 182 to 2920 days imprisonment. These included, for example, inciting a child, under 13 years of age, to engage in sexual activity where there is no penetration and the offender is under 18 years of age (CHI value = 182 days) vs. inciting sexual activity with a child, under 13 years of age, whereby the offender is aged over 18 and the sexual act involved penetration (CHI value = 2920 days).

It is important to clarify that the data set only includes crime that occurred between 1 June 2015 and 31 May 2016, as distinct from all crimes reported in that time period. Crimes reported within this period that occurred outside of the time frame, such as reports of sexual abuse that occurred when the adult victim was a child many years ago, have been excluded from our data set. We also include only crimes in which the victim was a Bnatural person,^ thus excluding crimes against the state, such as drug offences and crimes against businesses (see Sherman 2013; Sherman et al. 2016a).

The initial download from Niche-RMS comprised 31,039 crime reports. Within these records, a number of duplicate crime reports were discovered and excluded. The duplicates appeared to be generated as a result of the change in computer systems. The Bswitch over^ of systems had created some victims to have multiple entries within their demographic data, for example, the victim’s ethnicity code. During the initial download process, a large number of variables were selected for analysis. This resulted in a large volume of duplicate entries where the same unique victim code and crime report were present in the data but duplicated because of multiple variables created by the switch over.

Numerous attempts were made, by the Dorset Police Performance Analysts, to attempt to secure ethnicity and other key victim descriptors within the data set. Unfortunately, all those attempts were unsuccessful. A decision was made to exclude all ethnicity, occupation, and victim address information because the information recorded was not reliable. This resulted in 30,244 unique crime reports that could be

used to answer the research questions about the range of harm suffered by the 25,831 unique victims.

Each individual victim record was used to calculate each victim’s individual harm score. This score was the sum of the CHI value of each crime that they had suffered. For example, if a victim had suffered an offence of criminal damage to their vehicle (CHI score = 2) and burglary to their dwelling (CHI score = 18.75), a total harm score of 20.75 would be recorded for that unique victim. Each victim’s harm score was calculated and the victims were rank ordered, from highest CHI score to lowest, within the data set.

In order to examine the cumulative concentration of crime-harm scores at the high end of the CHI ranking, each individual harm score was added to the next one down the rank order. Starting with the highest-harmed victim in the rank-ordered list, the total harm score of that most-harmed victim was added to the harm score of the victim that had the next highest harm score. Their summed harm score was recorded and added to the harm score of the person with the third highest harm score. The cumulative harm score of the three most harmed victims was then added to that of the person that had suffered the next highest harm. This process continued downwards through the remaining victims before concluding at the last of the 25,831 victims. Table 1 provides selected cases from the rank ordering in the study’s spreadsheet.

A major limitation of these data is that they only cover the harm caused by recorded crime; thus, the full picture of harm contained within unreported and unrecorded crimes is absent. Moreover, incidents of anti-social behavior (ASB), which are known to be harmful as a result of the findings into the death of ASB victim Fiona Pilkington (IPCC

- 2016), are not always recorded as crime reports. Furthermore, a number of crime reports were not completely filled out. Some


variables were omitted by the recording officers. For example, some crime reports did not contain the victim’s gender, age, and place of birth; however, they may have contained other variables. As a result, the crime reports with missing variables were retained within the data set to allow for broad analysis of the limited variables that were present. The results indicate the volume of unknown variables when displaying the findings.

- Table 1 Extract from Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet used to demonstrate cumulative percentage of harm suffered by victims


Victim (highest harm to lowest harm)

Individual CHI score

Summing of CHI score

Cumulative percentage of the total CHI score

- 1 5,476 5,476 0.39%
- 2 5,475 10,951 0.78%
- 3 5,475 1,642 1.18%


- – – – –

- 13 3,675 56,966 4.08%
- 14 366.75 60,635.75 4.34%
- 15 3,660 64,295.75 4.60%


- – – – – 25,831 1 1,396,650.25 100.00%


Findings

The 25,831 individuals were recorded as being victims of 30,244 recorded crimes, distributed across the crime types as reported in Fig. 1, with the crime count for each of the crime types.

A plurality of the recorded crime (32.52%) related to crimes recorded under the classification of Bviolence against the person.^ This crime type accounted for a wide range of physical violence, from a push or punch resulting in minor injury up to serious assaults resulting in grievous bodily harm or even death. BTheft^ crimes account for 21.48% of the recorded crimes; this percentage increases to 31.27% of the total crime count when added to Btheft of a motor vehicle^ and Btheft from a motor vehicle^ crimes. The third largest crime category is Bcriminal damage,^ which, at 4883 crimes, accounts for 16.15% of the total crime count.

The 25,831 individuals recorded as victims for the 30,244 crime reports suffered a mean of 1.17 crimes per person. The average age of the victims was found to be 40.20 years of age (SD 18.07) (range 0 101) (mode 21). However, it is important to note that 597 crime reports had no recorded victim age in the record. The average age was calculated from 25,234 of the crime reports. That same number of crime reports was used to create Fig. 2, which demonstrates the distribution of crime by the age of the victim. Of note is that the majority of the crime victims were found to be male (53.51%).

Analysis of the crime data indicates that a number of the victims suffered repeat victimization. For the purpose of this analysis, repeat victimization is used to describe a person who suffered more than one offence. Over 3000 (3136) victims were recorded as suffering repeat victimization. Repeat victims, therefore, account for 12.14% of the

- Fig. 1 Count of crimes by classification over 1 year in Dorset


- Fig. 2 Reported age of crime victims

- Fig. 3 Distribution of cumulative percent of reported crimes by cumulative percent of victims


25,831 total recorded crime victims. The number of repeat victimizations ranged from 2 to 14.

On average, those victims who suffered repeat victimizations reported a mean of

- 2.41 crimes (SD 0.95) during the analyzed years’ worth of data. The distribution of the reported crimes to the number of victims is displayed in Fig. 3. The distribution of crime counts per victim is not highly concentrated, which could make it difficult to understand who to target (Sherman 2013).


Cambridge Crime Harm Index Distributions Each crime report was converted into a CHI harm score using the Beta Version of the CHI (available from the first author). Each Home Office Code was converted into the number that corresponded with the minimum number of days that an offender would receive in prison for committing the specific offence, based on the Sentencing Guidelines for England and Wales (Sherman et al. 2016a, b). This converted the crime count from 30,244 crime reports to a CHI score of 1,396,650.25 days of recommended imprisonment, on the hypothetical assumption that one person was convicted and sentenced for each offence. The harm attributed to each of

the crime classifications was assigned and reported as a percentage of the total harm. The distribution of the harm differed from the distribution of the crime count, as Fig. 4 demonstrates.

Figure 4 shows the differences between the proportions of crime in each category using a crime count compared to proportions of total CHI harm. The results indicate that 57.65% of the 1,396,650.25 total harm is reported within the category of sexual offences alone, which only accounted for 3.24% of the 30,244 total crime count. Together with sexual offence crimes, only the categories of dwelling burglary and robbery recorded higher percentages of CHI harm than of crime counts.

It should be noted that some of the crime classification categories are broad in the different offence types contained within each category, while some are extremely narrow. For example, victims that have suffered a violence against the person offence suffer a range of harm between 1 (common assault) and 5475 (murder). However, using two crime classifications with no range in harm scores, robbery and theft from motor vehicles, it is clear to see how these crime types affect the crime count and crime harm scores differently. A 50% reduction in thefts from motor vehicle crimes (1191.5 crimes) would account for a

- 3.9% reduction in the crime count and a 0.17% reduction in crime harm. Yet, a 50% reduction in robbery crimes (96 crimes) would account for less than 1% of a reduction in the crime count, yet make a 2.5% reduction in crime harm.


Due to the range of harm scores within some of the crime categories, such as violence against the person (1–5475), the average harm score was obtained.

- Fig. 4 Percentage of counts of crimes vs. percentage of CHI totals by crime classification


This was calculated by dividing the total harm suffered as a result of each crime type by the number of recorded episodes. The result showed that sexual offence crimes, on average, had the highest CHI scores (822.37 per crime), compared to the other crime types, such as violence against the person, which had an average CHI score of 30.66.

To understand the distribution of the harm among victims, every victim was provided with a harm score, which was calculated by totalling all the harm that they had suffered. On average, each victim suffered a CHI score of 54.07 (SD 283.54) (range 1–5476). The highest harm was suffered by a 13-year-old female who had suffered three sexual offences and one violence offence. Her CHI harm score was 5476. The lowest recorded CHI score was 1. Over 3000 (3198) victims suffered a harm score of 1, which accounts for 12.38% of the 25,831 victims. The distribution of the cumulative percentage of the harm is best displayed in Fig. 5.

Figure 5, in contrast to Fig. 3, clearly demonstrates an uneven distribution of harm. In a classic BPareto curve,^ a high percentage of harm is concentrated within a small percentage of the total victims. Analysis of the data identified 85.16% of the total Cambridge CHI harm of crime within Dorset was suffered by only 3.75% of the victims. As Fig. 6 shows, fewer than 4% of victims suffer over 85% of the total recorded harm, using the Cambridge Crime Harm Index (Sherman et al. 2016a, b) as the measurement of harm.

Figure 7 contrasts the distributions by rank-ordered victims of the cumulative totals of crime counts vs. the cumulative totals of CHI days recommended across all crimes, by victim. The visualization it presents indicates much greater concentration among a small portion of victims in the distribution of CHI values than in the distribution of total crime counts.

As Table 2 shows, the greatest concentration of harm across victims is found in 968 members (3.75%) of the victim population. These 968 people are referred to below for further analysis as the power few (PF) cohort.

The PF contains 968 victims who have suffered what we define for analytical purposes as high harm, compared to the 24,863 victims within the Bnot power few^ (NPF) cohort, who, using the CHI as a measurement, have suffered (for analytic purposes) as lower harm. The PF of victims can be seen to have suffered 4.77% of the total recorded crime count and, on average, suffered a mean CHI score of 1228.7 (SD 838.46) (range 365–5476). This is almost 147

- Fig. 5 Cumulative distribution of crime harm against the cumulative count of victims


- Fig. 6 Percent of victims vs. percent of total CHI harm, Dorset 2015–2016

- Fig. 7 Cumulative total harm concentration vs. cumulative total crime count


times the average harm score of the victims in the NPF, who suffered 95.23% of the recorded crime count at an average CHI score of 8.34 (SD 19.20) (range 1 308). The difference between crime count and crime harm can be seen in Fig. 7.

Having identified that a small percentage of the population suffered a high percentage of the harm, the following results compare selected differences between the two cohorts, including gender (Table 3) and age (Figs. 8 and 9).

While males suffer a higher volume of victimization, females suffer much higher levels of total harm—in both the power few and the not power few. The total harm score of females, within the PF, was 801,091.5. This equates to an average harm score of 1430.52 (SD 758.08) (range 365–5476). This compares to a total harm score of 386,831.25 for males in the PF, which results in an average harm score of 952.79 (SD 866.50) (range 365–5475). Within the NPF, females suffered a total harm score of 109,910, with an average harm score of 9.68 (SD 23.75) (range 1 308), compared to males in the NPF who suffered a total harm score of 96,941.75 and an average harm score of 7.22 (SD 14.24) (range 1 273).

- Table 2 Power few vs. not power few

Cohort comparison victims, crimes, and harm

Power few Not power few Complete victim data set

Count Percent of complete population (power few cohort)

Count Percent of complete population (not power few cohort)

Count

Count of crimes 1,442 4.77% 28,802 95.23% 30,244 Count of victims 968 3.75% 24,863 96.25% 25,831 Total harm suffered

(CHI)

1,189,382.75 85.16% 207,267.5 14.84% 1,396,650.25 average crime per

person

1.49 1.16 1.17 Average crime harm

person

1,228.7 8.34 54.07

- Table 3 Power few vs. not power few crime counts and CHI harm by gender


Age

The victims who suffered the most harm in Dorset were substantially younger than the victims who suffered the least. Figure 8 illustrates the distribution in which the average age of the 960 PF victims (8 did not have a recorded age) is 30.90 years (SD 16.78), while the average age of the 24,274 victims within the NPF (589 did not have a recorded age) is 40.57 years (SD 18.02). Over half (53.33%) of the PF are aged 12– 29 years, compared to only 30.03% of the NPF.

It is also important that the average age of female victims in the power few is substantially lower than the average age of male victims. The number of available victims to analyze as a result of having both the age and the gender recorded, as described in the methodology, was found to be 11,648 females and 13,536 males. This distribution between cohorts was as follows: 554 PF females, 404 PF males, 11,088 NPF females, and 13,130 NPF males. The results can be seen in Fig. 9. Over half (51.08%) of the PF female victims were aged 12–24 years, compared to 21.33% of NPF females. The findings relating to the age of male victims were similar.

Repeat victimization

There are two key questions about repeat victimization. Both relate to the theoretical preventability of crimes in that population, given the potential for predicting which

Cohort comparison: gender comparison

Power few Not power few Complete victim data set

Count Percent of power few cohort

Count Percent of not power few cohort

Count Percent of complete victim data set

Female 560 57.85% 11,352 45.66% 11,912 46.12% Male 406 40.94% 13,415 53.96% 13,821 53.51% Unknown 2 0.21% 96 0.39% 98 0.38% Grand total 968 24,863 25,831

- Fig. 8 Power few vs. not power few age

- Fig. 9 Power few vs. not power few, age of female victims


victims will suffer repeated crimes based on future research that identifies reliable algorithms for making such predictions. One is about the concentration of total harm within that population. The other is about the concentration of harm after the first offence in that population.

The first question is addressed by Fig. 10, which shows that there is great concentration of harm among the 3136 victims with more than one victimization (12% of all victims) who collectively suffered 29% of all the harm in the victim population. This may, however, be due to the amount of harm suffered on the first offence—at least as a possibility—at which time the fact that they will become repeat victims in the future is not known to police.

In order to understand what proportion of crime harm occurs among repeat victims after the first victimization, we split their total harm into first vs. subsequent crimes. That analysis showed that if we limit a definition of Bpotentially preventable^ CHI in Dorset to harm after the first crime against that victim in the year we analyze, a total of

- Fig. 10 Cumulative percent of harm among repeat victims


15.15% of all harm county-wide occurred during subsequent offences against a victim who had already suffered one offence. This compares to 13.85% of total harm across the county was committed against repeat victims during their first victimization reported in that year.

Table 4 provides further comparisons on the issue of repeat victimization between the PF and the NPF victims. Of the 968 recorded victims within the PF, 256 were identified as repeat victims (with up to 14 offences). Fewer than 1% of the total 25,831 recorded victims were identified as suffering 25.59% of the total 1,396,650.25 CHI days. This equates to an average harm score of 1395.93 per person (range 366–5476) suffered by repeat victims within the PF, compared against the average harm score of 16.57 (range 2–308) per person suffered by the 2880 NPF repeat victims. Repeat victims within the PF, therefore, suffered 84 times more harm, on average, than the NPF repeat victims.

Much of the difference between the power few and the NPF is due to differing proportions of sex offences, which carry very high recommended prison sentences. A total of 979 sexual offence crimes were recorded within the data set, with 497 victims of those crimes within the PF and 441 in the NPF. Sexual offence crimes were responsible for 37% of the 1442 crimes recorded within the PF, compared to 2% of the 28,802 crimes recorded within the NPF. The ages and gender were recorded on 932 occasions, in which 89.13% of the PF who suffered a sexual offence were female. Sexual offence crimes were responsible for 24.25% of the total 730 crimes suffered by repeat victims within the PF, compared to 1.1% of the 6819 crimes suffered by repeat victims within the NPF.

The other major point about high-harm repeat victimizations is that the victims’ ages are much younger than for the NPF repeats. Figure 11 demonstrates a substantial concentration of harm among repeat victims under the age of 18.

Table 4Power few vs. not power few: repeat victimization

against the total population CountPercent of complete

victim data set

victimization Power fewNot power fewComplete victim data set

against the total population CountPercent of not power few

CountCount percent of power few

Cohort comparison repeat

CHI score for non-repeat victims832,025.5059.57%159,544.5011.42%991,57071.00%

Number of non-repeat victims7122.76%21,98385.10%22,69587.86%

Number of repeat Victims2560.99%2,88011.15%3,13612.14%

CHI score for repeat victims357,357.2525.59%47,7233.42405,080.2529.00%

Total CHI score1,189,38385.16%207,267.5014.84%13,966.50.25

Total number of victims9683.75%24,86396.25%25,831

- Fig. 11 Power few vs. not power few, age of repeat victims


Conclusions

The present research appears to be the first description of crime harm distributions across all crimes and all victims over 1 year in one police jurisdiction. The description is in accordance with the expectation that total harm would be concentrated in a small proportion of all victims and that some of that harm could be, in principle, preventable. The study estimates that 15% of total harm occur after the first offence against victims, whose overall risk of a repeat offence within a calendar year is at least 12%. If the study could be conducted over a longer time period, such as 2 to 5 years, the probability of repeat crimes against the same victims would inevitably rise.

No matter how the risk of future victimization is calculated, this study demonstrates that prediction of future crimes against each victim is a worthwhile next step in refining police strategies for preventing crime harm—and not just crime counts. A victimfocused approach to crime prevention has long been advocated, but the case in relation to crime counts has not been compelling. As this study shows, there is little concentration of crime counts among victims. Compared to places and offenders, the concentration is far lower. Hence, police targeting volume of crime counts are better off focusing on places or offenders. Yet, when the target becomes the harm from crime, at least as measured by the Cambridge CHI, the concentrations become much larger.

Further work is needed to determine how much more predictable among victims crime harm is than crime counts are. Yet, this study provides strong evidence for pursuing predictive efforts. This can be done at the level of algorithmic forecasting with big data (Berk et al. 2009; Barnes and Hyatt 2012), or it can be done by detectives working on each new reported serious crime.

Our analysis found that the most-harmed victim was a 13-year-old girl who was raped three times and assaulted once (CHI score 5476). That 13-year-old girl was not simply the victim of crime on four occasions; she has repeatedly suffered one of the

highest-harm crime types within the CHI. The total CHI value of the crimes she suffered (5476) was 1 day more than the CHI value for murder (5475 or 15 years in prison). It is a striking finding that a victim could suffer the same level of severity of harm from cumulative crimes within 1 year as that defined by Sentencing Guidelines for the crime of murder. Yet, the key questions are about prediction and prevention, whether the first rape was reported before the further rapes occurred, whether (if so) the further rapes were committed by the same offender, what action (if any) was taken to prevent repeated rape, and what action might have been taken if systems based on this research had been set up to search for any relevant warning signals.

Similar questions can be raised about the next highest-ranked victim by CHI value in our study (excluding several murder victims—see Table 1). That victim was another 13-year-old girl, who was raped twice and has been the victim of two other sexual assaults (CHI score 5110). Prior to this research, she was only known by a Niche-RMS URN. Now, she is well known to relevant investigators and partners as an extremely vulnerable person not based on theoretical threat or risk but based on factual evidence. This is one of the benefits of creating named lists of the highest-ranked victims on the CHI scale. Putting names and harm levels into operational decision-making can advance their capacity to put a stop to repeated victimization, whatever the cause and whoever the offenders. Such lists may inspire curiosity to understand what crimes the victims have suffered to place them at such a ranking and build a case to do something more about it than simply investigating past crimes and prosecuting past offenders.

Victim harm is an emotive subject. It can be defined in a much more subjective way than we have defined it in this research, measuring the unique and important dimensions of each individual’s suffering (Maguire 1980; Shapland and Hall 2007). Some may consider our objectively measured findings of a power few with most suffering to be cold and impersonal if only because all comparisons are odious. Some may even consider that the use of evidence-based policing to stipulate how harmful a crime is to victim removes any compassion or sensitivity. Yet, the CHI approach used in this research may well open the door to far greater success at preventing harm from serious crimes, no matter how it is measured.

The intention of this study was to use evidence-based policing methods to identify which victims could be targeted with highest priority to reduce the most harm. These findings have provided the evidence of concentrated, high-harm victimization. The next step is the implementation of policy to reduce harm. As Ratcliffe (2014) has argued, police forces can (and should) focus on harm reduction and not simply Bcrime fighting.^ Dorset Police subscribes to Ratcliffe’s view and has a long-standing priority to reduce serious harm within the Police and Crime Plan. Yet before this research was done, there was no evidence-based method to measure and prioritize the harm suffered by victims. A recent 14% increase in reported crime made the front page of the local newspaper (Echo 2016), but the overall severity of crime harm was not reported. Nor was the CHI value of the crimes that were detected and sanctioned part of the public’s dashboard for crime.

The potential applications of this study are numerous, in Dorset as in other police agencies. It is not necessary for the CHI to replace the crime-count data. Rather, the CHI can simply supplement crime-count data of almost every kind. Forces could consider presenting their annual crime figures and detection rates together with the annual recorded harm score and the amount of harm that has been detected. These

findings alone could form a baseline upon which further years’ worth of harm data can be compared.

Police forces could also consider using CHI analyses like this one to review organizational structures and strategies. It is not necessary to dismiss the important, high-volume crime types which have lower harm scores. Rather, police forces may be able to develop evidence-based proactive and preventive measures, focused on the highest-harmed victims, such as young females, in Dorset, who may be at risk of sexual exploitation. Reviewing the pathways for victim support with partner agencies could also be considered, such as those of Children’s Social Care, to ensure that services are developed in line with the evidence of what is required to support high-harm victims.

Most important are the findings of the 15% of victim harm (or more) that might be preventable, as it occurs on repeat offences against previously reported victims. The opportunities for predicting repeat victimization can now be enhanced by the use of the CHI. This view is supported by the finding that less than 1% of the victim population, that was analyzed in this research, suffered over a quarter of the recorded harm, a power few within a power few. A further option could be in the development of nationally used record management systems, such as Niche-RMS. Each victim’s CHI score could be visible to all police staff and could be used to instigate targeted preventative opportunities.

This study should be a beginning, not an ending. Our hope is that other police agencies will replicate this study and submit the results for publication. It is only by steadily increasing the body of systematic knowledge about the harm from crime that police can increase their capacity to reduce it.

Acknowledgements This research was supported by a (UK) College of Policing bursary for Gavin Dudfield to complete the M.St. course in applied criminology and police management at the University of Cambridge, matched by equal funding and additional support from Senior Officers of the Dorset Police, including the data management assistance of Paul Marsh, Rachel Winbow, and Emma Knipe of the Dorset Police. The authors acknowledge the substantial value added to this analysis by Peter and Eleanor Neyroud for creating the BBeta Version^ of the Crime Harm Index, used in this research. Points of view and conclusions stated in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of Dorset Police or the Dorset Police and Crime Commissioner.

References

Barnes, G. & Hyatt, J. (2012). Using Random Forest Risk Prediction in the Philadelphia Probation Department. Washington, DC: National Criminal Justice Reference Service, Document NCJ241346.

Berk, R., Sherman, L., Barnes, G., Kurtz, E., & Ahlman, L. (2009). Forecasting murder within a population of probationers and parolees: a high stakes application of statistical learning. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 172, 191–211.

Bland, M., & Ariel, B. (2015). Targeting escalation in reported domestic abuse evidence from 36,000 callouts. International criminal justice review, 25(1), 30–53. Dorset County Council, (2016). Dorset County Council, Dorset statistics and census information. Retrieved 27 September 2016 from https://www.dorsetforyou.gov.uk/statistics Echo, (2016). Bournemouth Daily Echo. Retrieved 26 October 2016 from http://www.bournemouthecho.co. uk/news/crime/14813910.Crime_in_Dorset_up_14_per_cent_in_last_year__figures_reveal/ Economist (2016), BMeasuring crime: Bobbies on the spreadsheet. A new way to count crimes could reduce the amount of harm they cause^ London: The Economist 1 September. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary. (2014). Crime data integrity: inspection of Dorset Police November. London: HMIC.

HMIC (a), (2016). Her majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary, Dorset 2015, PEEL Assessment. Retrieved 27 September 2016 from http://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmic/peel-assessments/peel-2015/dorset/

IPCC, (2016). Independent Police Complaints Commission, IPCC report into the contact between Fiona Pilkington and Leicestershire Constabulary 2004 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2016 from https://www. ipcc.gov.uk/sites/default/files/Documents/investigation_commissioner_reports/pilkington_ report_2_040511.pdf

Jackman, Ralph (2015). BMeasuring harm in a cohort of sex offenders in Norfolk.^ Thesis for the M.St. in Applied Criminology and Police Management, Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge. Kerr, J. (2016). A descriptive analysis of the characteristics, seriousness and frequency of Aboriginal intimate partner violence in the Northern Territory, Australia: a strategy for targeting high harm cases. Thesis submitted for the M.St. in applied criminologyand police management, University of Cambridge. Knowles, Gabrielle (2016). BPolice target hit list of domestic abusers^ The West Australian, December 14. Macbeth, E., (2015). BEvidence-based vs. experience-based targeting of crime and harm spots in northern

Ireland.^ Thesis for the M.St. in applied criminology and police management, University of Cambridge. Maguire, M. (1980). The impact of burglary upon victims. The British Journal of Criminology, 20(3), 261

275.

Office for National Statistics. (2016). Research outputs: developing a crime severity score for England and Wales using data on crimes recorded by the police. London: Office for National Statistics https://www. ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/researchoutputsdeveloping acrimeseverityscoreforenglandandwalesusingdataoncrimesrecordedbythepolice/2016-11-29.

Pareto, V. (1896). Cours d’Economie Politique. Geneva: Droz [As cited in Taleb 2007]. Ratcliffe, J.H., (2014). Towards an index for harm-focussed policing. Policing. Oxford University Press. pp.

164–182. Rossi, P. H., Waite, E., Bose, C. E., & Berk, R. E. (1974). The seriousness of crimes: normative structure and

individual differences. American Sociological Review, 39, 224–237. Sellin, T., & Wolfgang, M. E. (1964). The measurement of delinquency. New York: Wiley. Shapland, J., & Hall, M. (2007). What do we know about the effects of crime on victims? International

Review of Victimology, 14(2), 175–217. Sherman, L. (2007). ‘The power few: experimental criminology and the reduction of harm’. The 2006 Joan McCord prize lecture. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 3(4), 299 321. Sherman, L. (2011). Al Capone, the sword of Damocles, and the police-corrections budget ratio. Criminology and Public Policy, 10, 195 206. Sherman, L. W. (2013). The rise of evidence-based policing: targeting, testing, and tracking. Crime and justice, 42(1), 377 451.

Sherman, L. W., (1992). Attacking Crime: Police and Crime Control. In Norval Morris and Michael Tonry (Ed.), Modern Policing: Crime and Justice, Vol. 15, (pp. 159–230). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Sherman, L. W., Gartin, P. R., & Buerger, M. E. (1989). Hot spots of predatory crime: routine activities and the

criminology of place. Criminology, 27(1), 27–56. Sherman, L., Neyroud, P., & Neyroud, E. (2016a). The Cambridge Crime Harm Index: measuring total harm from crime based sentencing. Policing, 10(3), 171–183.

Sherman, L. W., Bland, M., House, P., & Strang, H. (2016b). Targeting family violence reported to western Australia police, 2010–2015: the felonious few vs. the miscreant many. Perth, Australia: Western Australia Police https://www.police.wa.gov.au/About-Us/News/New-approach-needed-on-family-violence.

Taleb, N. N. (2007). The black swan: the impact of the highly improbable. London: Penguin. Tourist Academy, (2016). National Costal Tourism Academy, facts and figures about Bournemouth’s visitors.

Retrieved 27 September 2016 from http://nctastaging.com.gridhosted.co.uk/uploads/Bournemouth_ Facts_and_Figures_pages1.pdf

Wallace, Marnie (2009). Police-reported crime statistics in Canada, 2008. Juristat July. Statistics Canada

Publication 85 002-X. Weinborn, Cristobal (2017). PhD Dissertation, Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge. Weisburd, D. (2015). Weisburd, David. Bthe law of crime concentration and the criminology of place.^.

Criminology, 53.2(2015), 133–157. Wolfgang, M. E., Figlio, R. M., Tracy, P. E., & Singer, S. I. (1985). The national survey of crime severity. Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Yule, G. U. (1925). A mathematical theory of evolution, based upon the conclusions of Dr. J.C. Willis, F.R.S. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B, 213, 21–87. Zipf, G. K. (1932). Selective studies and the principle of relative frequency in language. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

